# THE AS IF / SIMULATION: Gnostic Civilization, Episode 6 | Jordan Hall and Pavel Shchelin

March 04, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxotyC--FdQ) 39:01

**J.Hall:**
Okay, so we're beginning to get our quarry in our sights.
The outline and the image is starting to become more clear.
This most recent conversation, we discussed the will as self.
We discussed the sleight of hand where the whole self is replaced by just a piece of self, the will.
And how this shows up across all the characterizations.
You went through a whole line when you spoke about the will of the people.
You spoke about the collective will, fill in the blank.
And then we began to actually string together a bunch of the different notions.
So we could actually begin to see the whole or the assemblage, the aggregate that Gnosticism puts in place of the actual wholeness that is reality.
So what's next?

**P.Shchelin:**
So next is in effect the sum of the previous two.
The deal and the will.
What is the Gnostic deal which is offered to the will?
There is many, many, many deals.
But I want to attempt to do quite a brave jump and maybe talk about the essence of a deal.
So what lies in the essence of a deal?
And yes, spoiler alert, it's in the title.
It's this very interesting phrase, as if, or you can use like, synonyms.
So what is the deal?
And I will start with the quote, which I tried to find on this device, but it didn't want to give it to me.
Well, which is interesting in itself.
So we will have to rely on the quote from my head.
And later I might put the perfect quote in the description.
The quote belongs to a Spanish conservative, Juan de Noso de Cortes, who's been writing in the mid-19th century.
And he gets this famous speech on dictatorship.
I'm not going to quote the whole speech.
I'm not even going to give the whole context.
But I'm going to give this quote.
The quote sounds like the following.
And you will be like, as if, rich.
That's the motto of the revolution of all low classes against nobility.

**J.Hall:**
Ah, okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
And you will be like, as if, aristocrats.
That's the slogan of all the revolutions of merchants versus nobility.
And you will be like kings.
That's the motto of the revolution of all aristocrats against the king.
And you will be like God.
That's the motto of the first revolution, which happened before the creation of time.
That's the quote.
So you see how, I think it's an essence of the trick.
And it comes directly to the will, to the self, to identity.
Because what, and to technology.
Like, it all comes down together.
Because what the Gnostic deal offers you is an opportunity to be somebody without, what?
Without bearing a cross of the somebody.
That's what lies into, like, that's what lies into this, as if.

**J.Hall:**
Okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
Again, you take the part, in that case, the appearance, and present it as a whole.
And it is very appealing.

**J.Hall:**
Aha.
So we have maybe three recurring themes.
One is the replacement of a real with a super salient simulation of the real.
In this case, we have a second piece, which has to do with the ability to teleport or to invoke magic, let's say, sorcery.
That instead of having the actual, the process that properly gives rise to the real.
Because the real can only be born.
The real can only grow the way.
But the real grows, let's say, properly or naturally, the way that it has been designed, from the seed.
If you wanted to eat real corn, you must plant real corn seed.
And it must grow through the process of becoming a real corn.
If you do something other than that, you do not, in fact, have real corn.
But you can just use a very coarse example.
I'll replace the corn now with an apple.
There is the rare child who actually has not, on occasion, pulled a fake apple off of decor, which looks like an apple.
It has made these super salient aspects of the visible.
And really, really aptly, the young child reaches out and grabs it, begins to notice something is wrong initially.
And it feels wrong.
It's not got the right weight.
And, of course, you get to try to bite it.
It's not a real apple.
Okay.
So there's two things.
One is I can give you a super salient simulation by foregrounding the elements that you are most able to perceive and might value in the lowest discerning way.
And I can skip all of the suffering, all of the work, all of the durée, all of the investment, all of the condition, all of the...
...participation that is necessary for the production of the wheel and giving it to you, which is a pretty good deal.

**P.Shchelin:**
I just want to highlight there is an interesting part.
It's not just about the process of becoming this as if.
Because you can say that, let's say, a revolutionary, not doing magic, of course, just following the laws of dialectics, is ready for a lot of suffering in a process.
You cannot just completely, like, it would be easier if they wouldn't.
I mean, how many people would like, we know all of these revolutions.
It's the reason why they are.
I'm not capable of it, it's another question.
Like, in my opinion, it's because good faculty are used in a different way.
But let's put it this way, they're capable.
But the idea of the deal is that once you hit this certain point, once you hit this point, for any future time, there will be no continuation of something you don't want to be part of this identity, effectively.
And in that case, for example, to me, as a political philosopher, the easiest example is the whole anti-monarchic, radical revolution of aristocracy, because ultimately it's a very simple idea.
Can I have the privileges of aristocracy without having to serve?

**J.Hall:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Anymore.
Right.
So it's in process of getting this right not to serve, I'm capable of many sacrifices.
I can even go and fight for it.
But once I get there, can I stop?
Like, can you give it me away?

**J.Hall:**
Yes, I think maybe the way of bridging is to say that the concept isn't ultimately down to suffering.
Yes.
As much as it is down to participating in the actual process.
Yes.
Of the thing.
Yes.
So you have a shortcut.
On the one hand, I have a shortcut.
And it may be a very hard shortcut, but it's a shortcut I can take.
And this is even more to the point.
I can adopt a self that is not myself.
This is really critical.
Yes.
Because the Gnostic identity is, at the end of the day, subject only to the limitations of the aspirations of the will.
Yes.
Anything that inhibits the will from achieving or receiving what the will wants is anathema.
Yes.
So I want to be the king.
Well, in reality, you are not the king.
Well, fuck that.
I want to go to the grocery store and I want to be able to pay money.
I'm willing to work really hard to get the coin to buy the identity of king.
But if I want king, I want king.
And we're saying in reality, the notion that reality actually has a reality of its own.

**P.Shchelin:**
There is tyranny of name.

**J.Hall:**
The tyranny of name.
This is anathema.
So that's the key.
I get both.
I get this super salient simulacrum, but I also get the triumph of the will.

**P.Shchelin:**
You get your triumph of the will.
Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
It comes to the triumph of the will.
And this triumph is exactly, again, comes back to the point of the tyranny of the name.
I don't have to be tyrannical to my name.
I reinterpret my name.
What does it mean to be noble?
Originally, it means to serve the king.
Well, let me rephrase it.
Let me remake it.
Now, noble means to have X amount of income or to have a certain lineage or to do a certain thing.
Right.
You're taking a part of it through your, exactly, through your will.
And again, in doing this, you are capable of many sacrifices, but it's sacrifices to ultimately to whom?
To your own will.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
This is the key.
Exactly.
Sacrifices to your own will.
And on the basis of sacrifices that at the end of the day, you are willing to make and you can make.
At the point of the tyranny of the name.
And I actually kind of like that because it was, I will accept the propaganda and just make it something that I, and noble, the point of the tyranny of the name is that there may be no sacrifice you can make because this is simply not yours.
It's that are all, there's all this.

**P.Shchelin:**
Even worse thought for a Gnostic.
Like, and that's a whole part if we go into it, like, because in reality, you basically experience of a name requires a certain experience of humility.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, quite.
Yes.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Because you are not given your own name.
Neither literally.
Like you received it from your parents, but even metaphysically, your whole identity, your whole unity is in a way not of you.
And you feel it.
There is this nudging feeling that it's not exactly of me.
There is this invisible, like mystical element, which if I go in one direction kind of works.
If I go in another direction, it kind of just doesn't feel like there is this nudging feeling.
And broadly speaking, it is about your name.
You are growing into your name.
You are like a corn.
You are growing into your name, but you are not, you didn't even plant this corn.
So you didn't even choose to be the corn.
But if you are already disembodied, if you already will alone, that feels like a nightmare.
That does feel like a prison.

**J.Hall:**
Remember your, your deepest presupposition is that the world is fundamentally broken.
Yes.
So that, which has happened to me as a consequence of reality itself.
Yes.
Is the worst possible thing.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's so unfair.
So what I can do, and that's a deep Gnostic trick, because that's why I think the Gnosis quote was so important.
He looked into it.
He looked into it in essence, because obviously on its surface, revolution would say, no, we don't go for a Ziff.
We will be merchants.
You will be rich.
Everybody will be.
They're claiming even to give you true identity, but deep in its side, you know, it's fake.
And that's the whole problem because obviously like you cannot change, like no one can change exactly the base code as I really like this metaphor from the previous episode.
So what it means to be noble.
You can read.
I mean, you, you, you can, if again, you can create something different, which we created pretty ugly, it will be, that's another thing, but you want to keep a noble name.
Oh, that's good.
That's the weird part of revolution.
You want effectively to keep the noble name.
I want to stop the fact of being noble, the privilege, because the name has a identity, has a privilege simply in terms of being, you can say that the being has a privilege being as something is a privilege of being something, anything, whatever it is, whatever it is.
So what I'm doing.
I'm doing in this trick, an agnostic trick and revolutionary, truly revolutionary trick.
I keeping, I keep the name, but I hollow it out.
So it doesn't limit my will.
Tempting.
Yes.
That's truly tempting.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
Very tempting.
Um, yeah, I was thinking about the experience of that.
So unfair.
And again, the, the feeling of, um, the distinction between suffering and meaningless suffering and the viewer suffering.
But you are.
You are aware of the fact that you are suffering in purpose, not for purpose, I'm sorry, on purpose, but for purpose in purpose, it is meaningful suffering and it is not perceived as unfair.
The easiest, simple example, like if you were training as an athlete, oh yeah, there was unpleasantness.
It burns your lungs to run a long way.

**P.Shchelin:**
It hurts, but you have your muscles literally tear up.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, you're actually, exactly.
You're actually tearing your muscles up.
And yet this, this experience you're having, this suffering is, is.
Is oriented towards a purpose, a higher purpose that gives it meaning.
It is meaningful.
And therefore, not only do you not complain, or at least not too much, you, uh, ultimately would choose to do it.
You actually subject yourself to it willingly.
And in fact, ultimately joyfully, this is, this is, this is what you're doing.
And so to be separated from the purpose, if you can separate the purpose and ideally, if you can separate the, even the notion of higher purpose, even better.

**P.Shchelin:**
Which we kind of did, aren't we?

**J.Hall:**
Great move, right?
Then all suffering.
Becomes meaningless suffering.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
And then, and then what is the Gnostic, uh, sleight of hand?
You have to give yourself a purpose and that's the key.
Now you say, Hey, Will, I'm going to give you a purpose.
The one purpose you have is to give yourself purpose.
So all this meaningless suffering is now meaningful suffering by virtue of having a proper purpose.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
But that's the thing.
It's interesting.
You still have, because you still live in the world, even if you pretend not to, you still using the old name.
So you don't, you can't, that's interesting.
But in fact.
A Gnostic cannot truly create a name.
It can only steal a name and give it and appropriate it.
So that's, it's a theft.
This famous line is like, you know, in a gospel, like the, wow, it does make more sense that when, uh, uh, Judas, uh, tells Christ, like, uh, after the woman spends the precious soil to anoint him and he says, very rational argument.
Why not just to sell it and care?
About the poor alleviate the suffering.
Why just not do it?
And it's interesting that in the response, John doesn't tell us that it's bad to care about the poor.
It doesn't do anything about it, but he says he said it not because he cared about the poor, but he calls, but because he was safe in his heart.

**J.Hall:**
Right.
This is, I think this is such a sweet thing because the argument is not exactly as you say, the argument is not the assertion that he made is false.
The argument is that.
He's not.
He's not really even actually making the assertion.
Yes.
He's, this is, it's called a lie.
And the more true the lie is, the more it is actually a lie, right?
If it's, if I'm sort of uttering pure nonsense, it's not a lie.
If I say something that is almost perfectly true, in fact, ideally again, super salient, I'm actually hitting a certain note just a little bit more and pushing it to the foreground.
So you can't, unless you're really discerning, you can't even quite tell that I'm lying, that I'm really good at what I'm doing.

**P.Shchelin:**
So that's.
That's exactly the thing.
So, but this as if trick is, you said it before, meaningless suffering.
The real trick within this sleight of hand trick, like, because Gnostics would know about it.
Like, so obviously they know about it.
Spirit is smart.
So you need to destroy the meaning on a very deep level.
That's another part of the story.
And this destruction happens that even those people who see the bane of meaningless existence.
Because of the already presuppositions about will, about reason, the weakness of spirit, the meekness of heart, they end up in a tragic state that they cannot even believe meaning is possible.
The only best thing they can hope for is the second best thing.
And that's a famous line of our common person.
We both know, like, I want, I have to live my life.
As if it is true.
And that's this final, not final, but that's one of the deepest Gnostic sleight of hands.
So let's take a good thing.
Like, let's even, I will even let you like a good thing.
It's like morality.
Like the cut flower.
But as if it is true.
It's not truly true.
I can't make myself with my whole being accept its whole truthness.
Because it will limit my will.
It will impose the tyranny and anemone on much deeper level I'm willing to accept.
So I will go into as if.
But why, you would say, in effect, it is also interesting.
Until a certain time, as if will work.
Like, in outward experience.
For example, I can keep a strict moral code.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
Like, and it might even work until, like, pretty good point.
But what is this moment when it might not work?
Well, ultimately, usually when it gets real, when this vortex gets really broken.
When some amount of suffering comes.
Or some amount of tragedy comes.
Or some.
Plague comes or some flood comes, which makes, basically, as if is not enough.
And is the if is never enough.
And then, ultimately, it's not enough.

**J.Hall:**
So we talked also before we got on to recording about the two places where there's a loss.
And I think this is the same story.
So as you say, as me, as me in my life, my as if will fail at some particular point.
Some particular perturbation, some degree of suffering, or, by the way, possibly some degree of surprise, something that comes in that is just so overwhelming that I can't even can't rationalize it yet.
I'm stuck.
I'm in sort of a state of awe.
It will also fail there.
But the suffering is the most useful, useful case.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, again, truth be told, it can also, it's as a big suffering or some big excess.
I don't know.
You become so successful that whatever too much, something that overwhelms the model, right?

**J.Hall:**
The whole point is the model is just a model overloading.

**P.Shchelin:**
Even.
Even technical term would be better truth.
Yeah.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
And then the second piece is lineage transmission.
Yeah.
You cannot convince your son to live the same as if that you do.
It cannot be passed down.
This is why you see the degeneracy catch start to build in the first few generations.
They can kind of work through it as if can hold together.
And because it provides this comfortable lie, the super salience, you can point to it and say, look, we're rich.
Yeah.
We became rich.
We live.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes, we don't truly believe in it, but.

**J.Hall:**
But.
Right.
But by the time.

**P.Shchelin:**
But they believe in it.
Okay.
Peasants believe in it.
I imitate my belief.
It's fine.

**J.Hall:**
It's fine.
By the time you get to the grandson, the as if is not going to work.
And now you've lost it.
So you lose it one way or another.
Now, of course, this goes back to the point is now the doubling down has to occur.
We have to go even deeper, right?
Because we, we, we, to come all the way back is guarded by the, at the gates of fear.
Yeah.
And the gates of pride.
Yes.
We've got a bunch of really good, um, guards preventing us from going back.

**P.Shchelin:**
I'm not a moron.

**J.Hall:**
So you go forward, right?
I'm not a moron.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because to accept that as a very interesting part, which may be, you know, in better the technical side of it, but I've noticed that in gradient psychology, it's in, it's basically, yeah, the further you go, you would rather dies and accepted.
You were wrong.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, quite.
And they're in fact, people who have the interview.

**P.Shchelin:**
And collectively, I have as a great expression in Russian to explain the settings, which is not really translatable.
So more on in Russian, it's called law effectively.
So again, the sucker effectively.
So I'm not a sucker like, and that's the trick because again, it's a sleight of hand.
It would be actually an example of ultimate heroism to accept you were wrong.
Yeah.
It will actually make you bigger than any Achilles like, or any Caesar to say.
That I was wrong for all my life and now I'm accepting it.
Yes.
That's such a heroic act, but it's a sleight of hand is now you are a moron to do it.

**J.Hall:**
So drilling down into kind of the weaponry.
Yeah.
So now we're grappling.
We haven't just found our core.
We're now grappling with our core.
What does he do?
The image of the hero and the, the most important, not the most important, but a very important thing.
The notion of to be humble must not be the hero, the hero heroism.
The hero heroism has to be invested towards hypertrophy, self-expression, exclusively incredible will, like not just will, but an incredible will, right?
Not just reason, but incredible reason, right?
Do you have, do you have to be able to take your identity, your will, and express it through self-expression of tremendous.
And so hero has to be pardon quantity in quantity intensity.
And so if I can, if I can make it so that the thing that we are identifying as being, let's say truly a really heroic is disparaged is defamed.
Then my heart, my heart says, when, as soon as I realized the identity or the, the, as if can no longer hold, and I'm looking, okay, where does reality live?
I begin to open the door and I recoil that because that has already been defamed before, before, before I even began, it's been defamed because when that moment was going to come.
Yes.
Okay.
And then, and then of course you have to have the other piece we have, we have to keep bringing this back in.
There's a subject.
Objective, objective dynamic that I ultimately, it's like the image, the image actually, I've had this image a long time.
So imagine a Iron Man, remember Iron Man?
Okay.
Now imagine that for, for reasons, Tony Stark begins to just wear the Iron Man armor all the time.
His body will actually begin to become atrophy, right?
So you have an atrophied body inside of a power to armor suit.
And so we have an atrophied soul inside of a Gnostic civilization.
Yes.
Which allows an atrophied soul to produce something like living.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
It's a simulation of living.
It's mere survival, but it's something like living.
But as soon as my heart says I, this, this atrophies are working.

**P.Shchelin:**
It is the truth.

**J.Hall:**
I'm, I'm in fact actually atrophied.
So I, to be humble is to acknowledge the reality that I'm atrophied and to accept, to pay, I have to pay the bill, right?
I can no longer participate in the civilization, which means I have to crawl out of my powered armor and begin the process of actually growing.
I can no longer participate in the civilization, which means I have to crawl out of my powered armor and begin the process of actually growing again.

**P.Shchelin:**
And I will definitely experience this as a sucker.

**J.Hall:**
Like, I will have to, I will, I was a sucker.
And I'm by the way, going to be kind of a shitty for a while.
Very few people are willing to pay that price.

**P.Shchelin:**
Especially when generationally.

**J.Hall:**
Oh, yeah.
Like you.
And by the way, many, many people who are right at the edge of paying that price will absolutely shit on the one who does.
Because that, right?
That's a terrible condemnation to see what you should be doing and are afraid.
To do in your heart, somebody else doing it.
And they also look small and meek and bad.
Of course, you have to take them out.
You can't let them continue.

**P.Shchelin:**
I will stay to the second best option, but the truth is, and that's the tricky part.
Why the truth doesn't work and we will know already before, because ultimately it has nothing underrated.
I will expand on a pretty example on a very practical level.
I will go into very particular example as a recent collapse of the Syrian government and general troubles in Middle East.
And this is a very dangerous.
Full shadow for the civilization, like for many reasons, what you had in like effectively Syria was this as if state, it was state created by colonialists out like there was no organism, like there was no organic or even logo in this, like it was a pure simulacrum, like, but it kept order, like for generations kept order actually through a lot of violence, like this power, power, like and lies, but mostly power, but effectively.
De-generated was in couple, like two generations, two generations, two generations, couldn't kept it anymore.
It's external source of power.
In that case, it was Russia kind of collapse.
No, no, no, not collapse, but had more important business to attend.
That's the most tricky.
Just resources are limited.
Nothing personal reallocation of resources.
Again, American Afghanistan, Afghanistan is a second example, truth be told in Vietnam, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Well, and then a very small, suddenly.
What?
You could have control for decades, like just a group of 3000 Turkish funded Islam fighters managed to topple the whole country in a week.
You notice what is happening?
It's a true triumph of will, because there is nothing in a triumph of will for it to be good.
Yeah.
When we live as if, when the real life and death question comes, it won't be good enough.
And we will surrender to any strong enough will.
No matter how.
Barbaric, cruel, evil, et cetera.
It is.
That's the problem.
Will as if makes you impotent on the most deepest level.
That's the problem.

**J.Hall:**
Right, right, right.
So the kind of the big picture is something like as if is intrinsically depleting.
Yes.
It becomes asymptotically fragile.
At some point, the fragility will cross over an ambient perturbation.

**P.Shchelin:**
Sometimes barbarians will come.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
And the barbarians may be surprisingly impotent, but you're going impotent faster than they.
And you actually, they're probably becoming strong because they're earlier in some cycle.
And so, and the end comes.
Yes, for sure.
This is the death of civilization.

**P.Shchelin:**
And the reason, like, and the only reason barbarians can do it, like, not because they have guns, not because they have power, but they do have material power.
The only power they have is the power you lost.
It's the power to believe in anything.
They might believe in a falsehood.
But they're actually still capable of believing in it.
Nice.
While you made yourself incapable of believing in anything.

**J.Hall:**
Aha, aha.
Yeah.
So I just want to put this out.
Right.
We, again, we talked about this, but we talked about, I asked you the question, was Socrates a Gnostic?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
And you said, ah, but Plato was definitely in moving in that direction or partially.
And I proposed, or maybe we proposed.
If it's wrong, I proposed.
If it's right, we proposed.
Ironically.
That Socrates was a...
An honest pagan, in the sense that he actually was directly connected to a daemon.
He believed in something.
He was actually in communion vertically with a spirit.
And this inhibits the capacity of the Gnostic sleight of hand.
One of the key elements of the Gnostic, maybe the key element of the Gnostic sleight of hand, is that it has to separate you from actual spirit.
Right?
So this is the thing.
It pretends.
Oh, that's it, isn't it?
It says, first, ah, what a great move.
First, the world is fundamentally bad.
Material.
The body is fundamentally bad.
And therefore, by the way, salvation is to be found in the spirit.
But it's actually not giving you the spirit.
The first simulacrum it gives you is the simulacrum of spirit.
And it uses that to defame the true body.
And true spirit.
Once it defames the true body, it can separate you from the true spirit.
And now it's got you.

**P.Shchelin:**
Now it's got you.
And until you go back to the beginning, you're still ending up being trapped.
And again, in the context...
In the context of antique civilization, my favorite example is, like, Cicero.
You know, the Cicero famous law.
And it's not like he was a famous lawyer and, like, all this, like, basically all rhetorics is based upon him.
But the most characteristic part of his identity to me, Rome is interesting because it went two cycles.
You mentioned the collapse of empire, but before there was a true collapse of republic.
Yeah.
And there is a reason why they elected Cicero.
And it's an important reason.
And this reason is actually Cicero, like, symbolically.
Yeah.
Because Cicero was the highest...
He was the highest pontiff of a Roman cult who could not even say whether gods exist.
He was the highest, best statesman who didn't truly know what common good is.
He could not say it.
His reason and his as-if made him so profoundly talented, but also so impotent.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
Very good.
Yes.
Hmm.
Yeah.
So I'll make this extremely banal.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's good.

**J.Hall:**
Extremely banal.

**P.Shchelin:**
We need to jump.
Mm-hmm.

**J.Hall:**
Um, for many, for this is very, for the mass, for the, for the populi, we have, uh, movies, cinema, and we actually have games.
And what I noticed just in my, in my short life, you have a movie, let's say, let's just use Star Wars as an example, Star Wars one and two.
From a cinemagraphic perspective, very silly, impressive for the moment, but in comparison to what they can do now, nothing, right?
But at the level of something like believing in something.
There was a reality to the mythos, which is why it became a thing for children of the seventies and eighties.
It was a thing.
I mean, it really was a mythos.
Many, many kids grew up thinking they wanted to be Luke Skywalker.
Okay.
The contemporary version, like whatever episode they're at now, is an absolute spectacular in terms of visual effects and absolutely believes in nothing.

**P.Shchelin:**
And nobody can believe in it.

**J.Hall:**
And nobody can believe in it.
Exactly.
It's hollow, perfectly hollow.
A candy coating shell that is very shiny and hollow.
The same thing happens with games, by the way, which is funny.
Games seem almost incredibly superficial, but if you remember the beginning of a game, the first, first version of a game that's very popular always has something.

**P.Shchelin:**
And they even commercialize this.
Like that's important.
Like basically they remember this feeling of authenticity in the beginning of a game.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.

**P.Shchelin:**
And they're trying the most to commodify it.
Yes.
Just that's why it's what people complain that endless recycling of old ideas without actually creating anything new.

**J.Hall:**
So this is the as if.
Yeah.
This is the as if.
I can, I can give you something that is very, very shiny simulation of the thing that is actually real.
And the further I get away, the less I can give you anything like the real, all I can give you a shiny until eventually it just pops.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Eventually it pops and it pops pretty ugly.
That's important.
It will pop on the lowest possible kind of levels.
That's why I mentioned the, again, don't like because barbarian is paired with civilization, but for audience, let's say barbarians is ugly, savage.
It will come.
Yeah.
Because at least it truly believes in himself.
You even like, that's the tricky part.
You even stop truly believing in yourself.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Right.
Right.
Because

**P.Shchelin:**
At least he believes in himself.
I smack.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
I can.

**J.Hall:**
To use the image.
If you've gotten on the train of choosing mere survival over life, you will reach a point where you choose death over mere survival.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Yeah.
And that's the streak.
Like it plays.
And keep.
But when I mentioned and but why we started with revolution, because it is the same trick, like it is the same trick.
The moment you choosing the form without an essence, speaking philosophically, raising a little bit high, you are in the game.
Yeah.
But that's what's so tempting in a beginning to offer.
Because again, that's the reason we hate the monuments.
Like they're like, so we hate the monuments, not because we are better than them, but because we don't want to be judged by their standards.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's why we actually need to desacralize the hero.
I'm not even speaking about desacralizing the hero of heroes, the king of the kings.
You need to actually, you can start with it, but then you need to desacralize like literally everything.
Any king, any hero, any authority, anything.
Everything must be desacralized.
Because as you said, because anything is sacred and you are not good enough.

**J.Hall:**
Like I'm trying to sell a saccharine hero.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I cannot have people actually seeing and tasting real heroism.
Yes.
Can't happen.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
And that's what you do.
You do the saccharine heroes.
But again, it can work once, like to not really work, but it feels as if it's real.
But that's one technical element, which I don't know why, but there is an absolute collapse of marginal utility of this story.
Like you need to expand like exponentially more resources with every iteration with exponentially less outcome.

**J.Hall:**
So this is the inverse, right?
You get two principles.
One principle is the principle of fragility, the hollowing out.
And the second principle is the principle of exponential effort.
So you get, you have to spend more and more for less and less.
And in both cases, there's a terminal point, right?
Yeah.
By the way, this is objectively true.
Like there's their actual, like Tainter studies this in the objective domain.
So they can do that entire regime, which I've spent plenty of time on.
But the point is now we're doing something, which is speaking about it at a deeper level, like the actual essence of what's going on.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
Wow.
That's, that's cool.
And yeah, we kind of know how the story ends.
That's why I brought Syria, but that's like, like in the West or in the East or like, I don't care.
Like India, China, Japan, doesn't matter.
The story will always played out the same, how you put it, how I phrase it in the same way.
Good civilized people who believe in their heart and nothing will always lose and surrender to an honest savage or in our case, an honest pagan.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
Interesting.
I'm actually, if you look at pop culture right now, you're beginning to see the emergence of dishonest pagans, but they may actually be looking to find out how to become honest pagans.

**P.Shchelin:**
They just don't know how.

**J.Hall:**
They don't know how.
But if they discover it, they'll be the ones.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, but also the tricky part, as we discussed, they can't.

**J.Hall:**
And they can't.
Right.
This is the tricky part.

**P.Shchelin:**
But they don't know.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
But they don't know that.
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
But the desire is there.
And it's, and that's the story behind this desire.
Like, because like.
Yeah.
It's so shallow.
Like I, I'm still searching, like I'm still searching for this rock to stand up on any rock, but this obviously that's for whatever, for dumb people, but it's also part of the sleight of hand.
Like it's pretty tough job if you had to give the credit where credit is you, like you need to keep the sleighting hand on every level because something in us naturally tries to bring us back even just by the consequences or overreaction.
So on every turn you need to make a different sleight of hand to just, okay, you want a hero.
You want a hero.
Fine.
Here is a sucker and hero.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
So, so we talked a little bit about the notion of, in, in the domain of the deal.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
And the sucker and the, and the crook.
Then you get this really interesting kind of fractal collapse where an inner circle of crooks initially leverages the asymmetry of saying, look, we all know what's up.
We're all crooks.
And if we all work together, we can really get to suckers.
Milk to suckers.
We can really get the suckers.
And of course, as we know, the problem is as soon as that circle of crooks is closed, some of them are going to have to become the suckers inside that circle because that's the nature of the structure that they're in.
And so they have to intensify this intensification.
So this is why when you look at the, the late stage, like when, when you're near the end of Syria, when you're near the end of wherever, the gangs start to take over, right?
Because the gang is the closest thing you get to like an honest pagan, an actual barbarian.
Yes.
A sophisticated, somewhat self-aware crook that is trying to milk the last bit of potency out of a decaying structure using this hook of increasing intensity.
So it becomes very violent.
It's a lot of violence.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's where the violence will come from.
Like people are surprised where all the violence is coming from.
Well, here is your story.
That's where the violence is like, I think it's, let's say root, like the root and even on a tricky level.
Desire for this, because on the deepest level, that goes a little bit Freudian, but again, he missed the mark, but he glimpsed it right at accidents.
There is some desire for this, like, so there is the desire for this pagan come and destroy us.
There is this desire for death, as you said, and it is, can actually become desirable because if death is my only way of stop, of not admitting my modernness, there is a high chance.
I take it.
There is a high chance.
I taking, especially if it's the only thing I experienced being at these very, very low

**J.Hall:**
spiritual levels is actual agony.
And perhaps death is better.

**P.Shchelin:**
We think so because we think of death as the end, which is not very important.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
This is important.
Once you realize the death, not the end, then you're really stuck.
Then you've only got one way to go.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, that's the trick.
So is that, but.
Well, actually the note is the trickiest part.
We live in a culture in which as if death doesn't exist.
Do you know what I'm saying?
No.
If you compare like any traditional, any traditional culture, death is a part of their daily life.
People visit cemeteries, people go to the, like there is always funeral, somebody's always being buried.
Generally, truth be told, death is not seen as a tragedy.
It's not a tragedy, but it's some part of the cycle of life of family, community.
Basically it's not.

**J.Hall:**
Most importantly, it's experienced.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's experienced.
Yeah.
Constantly.
It's a phenomenon.
From the youngest.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
It's an actual lived experience.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's a lived experience.
Yeah.
Well, we kind of made everything to free ourselves from this experience.
Like it's like on every level, like I'm not just speaking about hospitals as a curing places, but this whole idea of dying and like, I know you can't keep saying on my head, but there are studies which absolutely explore it, but of course I get it.
It's so moved away from you do live as if you're never going to die.
Right.

**J.Hall:**
You don't even see old people.

**P.Shchelin:**
You don't even see old people.

**J.Hall:**
Certainly you don't see old people who are about to die.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
You may have to actually struggle mightily to be able to.

**P.Shchelin:**
Right.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
This is very important.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's maybe the ultimate as if, like if anything, as if, as if you are immortal, as if you're immortal.

**J.Hall:**
And it is the ultimate as if in the sense that it will definitely end.
You will be, you will find yourself face to face with the reality that that was an as if.
Yes.
And unfortunately there'll be, it'll be too late.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Final trick of hand.
And there is one more element to this trick of hand.
Like, actually I like how it connects to the final episode because for this to be possible, you actually need the simulation to be really salient.
And you need to have this good word, but completely perverted, certain peace.
You need to pretend that violence can be tamed for you.
I mean it like in a sense that like that's, let's hold this Leviathan comes into play.
That's why.
Okay.
That's where as a state comes into place.
That's why.
And we mentioned before it becomes important.
That's truly terrifying, but we will double down more of it, please.
But we need something that anything brings death.
Yes.
To messes out of order.
No, no, no, that's not good.
That's the ultimate, let's say, enemy to this.
