# THE WORLD IS BROKEN: Gnostic Civilization, Episode 1 | Jordan Hall and Pavel Shchelin

Feb 27, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=51Vyt4K6jv4) 36:37

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, hello, Jordan.
We'll start our conversation with meeting each other.
And I think it is important that every story, and we're here to tell a story, begins with the storytellers sitting together and not just floating in the dense air of ideas.
But it is the dense air we're going to talk about.
Because our story is not the usual story.
Our story is about the air we breathe, the water we swim in without knowing where we're even swimming in it.
It's a story about how we build a tower, and we're living on its 200th floor, and the shade of the tower has completely obscured the foundation of the tower.
So the foundation became self-evident.
So we're going to talk about these things.
We're going to talk about the self-evident assumptions about the nature of reality, which can be summarized under the smart-sounding word Gnosticism.
But the reason why I am going into this story is to share my fascination with it and to make a step aside.
If I'm a fish, I want to jump out of the water for a moment and look from this thing, you know, a flying fish is doing and look a little bit on the water to see what is the air we are breathing.
If I'm a fish, I want to, for a moment, imagine myself it's being an author.
It's a tricky part, we can, but I don't think we can truly do it alone, and that's why I invited you here to this place, which is symbolic and meaningful to me, but also I hope to you as well, and happy to be around you.

**J.Hall:**
I'm loving the experience of somebody who would be watching this and might be curious about where this place is, and even if it is.
I'm not going to resolve that question.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's a good part.
It's already hinting in what we're going to talk about in the future.
Small salt of mystery in any good story is necessary.
But anyway, so the name of the story is The Gnostic Civilization, How Our World Is Made.
And truth be told, it's a pretty good title.
Like, it actually covers what we're going to talk about.
So we're going to talk about civilization, we're going to talk about Gnosticism as these underlying meta-principles, under which most of the stories we share are structured, willingly or unwillingly.
And the way we're going to do it is we're going to look straight into assumptions.
We're not doing it chronologically.
We're going straight into principles and how they manifest in us, because the truth is part.
Guilty, partially Gnostic myself.
Like, still, like, it's not something I can say I'm free of it.
No, it's part of me.
So I'm going to talk about it.
And I'm going to talk about it.
I'm telling effectively my story.
But also, like, how it manifested 2,000 years ago, 500 years ago, yesterday, and most probably will even manifest tomorrow.
But right before we jump into it, I do want to put you on a spotlight.
Tell me, why are you interested in this story?
Like, why did you agree to talk about this story?

**J.Hall:**
I have to rewind, because the last week has been super saturated with significance and signs that I want to use to answer your question.
But of course, I agreed well before that.
To be perfectly honest, the beginning of the invitation was you said that you had been called to this inquiry, and that you noticed that you could not do it monologically.
It required dialogue.
And this felt very right in the sense of an insight.
And for whatever reason, a conversation with me would be there.
A good idea, let's say.
And so I inquired into what is this question?
Like, just from the hints.
Because you notice there's an interpolation in just that way of speaking about it that tells you a lot.
And when I say inquired, we could say I prayed.
And because that's exactly what happened.
I was not alone in the inquiry.
And the image that came up was actually very intense.
And I could actually feel almost a certain sense of fear of being in this chair, having this conversation, which I've learned means go that direction.
And if I'm invited rightly, then it is almost certainly the direction that I am specifically supposed to go on.
So to put it a different way, I heard that this was a call.
So that's why I'm here.

**P.Shchelin:**
This is the first conversation of the seven we're going to have.
And as any good story, has to have a beginning.
So let's start with the beginning.
What is the most basic underlying agnostic assumption?
And to an extent, our assumption.
And it is very tricky.
It is such an innocent claim that the world is made flawed.
The world is broken.
That there is something inherently wrong with the way the world is.
And let's look at the trick.
And the trick is in the beginning.
In Genesis, the world is created good.
So the world is not, by its nature, bad.
And in Gnosticism, there is some original flaw with the world.
The difference is very subtle, as with all of the stories we're going to tell.
But from these subtle differences, all of the big tree of conclusions emerges, which became so natural to us.
Like one way.
The second manifest, which we often experience, is that the world is a form of prison.
A prison you need to run away from.
And I think it's worth to go in the beginning first.
I think, yeah, it makes relevant.
Like how is the subtle difference?
Because they do have a God even in the story.
But it's not the Christian God.
So the Gnostic original, the most basic Gnostic story, runs in something like this.
There is a realm of ideas.
Or not even ideas, but the spiritual reality.
There is a realm of a spiritual reality.
And this spiritual reality, is good.
But a part of this, and there is something which they would call God there, in this reality.
But one of the spirits in this reality was pretty ugly.
It's actually, they would call like some ugly form, some reject of this perfect being.
And in its imperfection, it created matter.
It created the material world, which became a trap for the souls, for the immaterial.
And that's how the world worked.
we live in, says Gnostic mycosis, this early times is made.
And this is so radically different from the idea of a world created good, but then falling.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
So, in some sense, this is the story of reason.
This is the story of reason personified.
This is the experience of reason.
If yourself is reason, then that's the actual experience of the reality you find yourself in.
And then when reason, on reason's own basis, endeavors to make sense of the experience that reason finds itself in, it tells this story.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
Inescapably, because that is the story of reason, which is to say the story of a faculty of the whole separated from the whole, which cannot by its very nature recapitulate or recommune itself with the whole, but is, when separated, has the capacity to usurp the position of the throne, let's say, and tries on the basis of its own power, its own will, to recover the wholeness from which it is left.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Because that's where the story is diverged.
Like, now we have a seat, we have a trunk of a tree, and here the story is diverged.
This recovery can happen in many different ways.
The classic Gnostic way is to run away from a prison.
That's why early Gnostic sects often end up in suicide.
Yes, mass suicide.
And it makes sense.
So you need to free your spirit.
And the most radical form of liberation of the spirit is to free yourself from the matter.
And since, again, here it depends on different traditions, but ultimately, through different, like, let's say, practices or wills or intentions or predestinations, some souls are capable to jumping out of the prison back into this realm.
And you can see how it doesn't sound that appealing.
Like, this version of reclaiming your position does not sound truly appealing to us.
Some very deep feeling in us is still clinging to life.
Like, we don't really want, like, again, we can do it on, like, sometimes cases happen individually, but it would not become a massive story.
Like, the massive story of Gnostics wouldn't become massive.
This whole feeling of a broken world would not become truly appealing to masses of people.
And to us, it wouldn't become the doxa of modernity if it were a state here.
And that's actually where Christianity played a big role, surprisingly.
Because Christianity brought a very interesting thing we also hold to be self-evident, which was not for most of the cultures ever in history.
That optimism.
Gospel is a good news.
If you look for an ancient Greek, the idea that you can expect anything good of this world is madness.
Like, it's if anything human hubris, which got

**J.Hall:**
banished.

**P.Shchelin:**
The idea that some radical improvement can happen.
The idea that, like, anything good can follow in part through your actions, through will, like, through human participation, you can say.
Like, let's even steal now and further.
In the beginning, it's just about participation.
So, this idea is Christianity in its natural.
And it came, and it transformed, it created the Christian tradition.
And then, millennia and centuries, between the point of good news and between the return, you can say, of this Gnostic spirit.
The spirit went a little bit in a slumber.
It kind of slept.
Stayed under the shadows.

**J.Hall:**
Well, we should say, the spirit has an internal mandate.
Yes.
The internal mandate is to, in fact, to consume all.
As you say, if it is not subtle, it will consume only a very, very narrow few.
So, it must become more subtle.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
And this subtleness basically until we became tired.
Because there is one very interesting part of the Christian story, Christian optimism, that it requires a lot of patience.
Like, my favorite part is Ascension, when Christ is going into heavens, and the Apostles ask him the most normal, rational, human question.
When are you going to come back?
Effectively.
Please tell us time, date, we can prepare.
It's not your business to know.

**J.Hall:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Very radical proposition and very counterintuitive proposition for us.
Let me put it this way.
So, we don't know.
And this not knowing is essential part, like Christian life.
But it's not an easy part.
And over the course of millennia, with many different stories playing around, which we're going to talk about, mention it, but some big events, let's say, some stuff like plague, religious wars, stuff like general appeal to reason, rediscovery, what the people would call renaissance, love reason.
Like, the waiting became tiresome.
Especially among people which usually have the most free time on their hands.
Elite.
Like, I mean, elite, both intellectuals and physical elites.
And the Christian understanding of unfallen world slightly changed.
Now it became a fallen world, which you need to improve.
That's a subtle, slight step.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, we have to be very careful with that.
And I don't mean, if we want to get it right, we'll have to spend the time to be able to get to the bottom of that.
And allow that subtlety to be, to unfold, because it's a very significant move.

**P.Shchelin:**
What I mean is, like, it's one thing to say that the world is fallen, and to understand it as the result of effectively a fall of human heart.
It's the same understanding, but different ways of explaining it.
Like, one says it's effectively the history, the price of the falling of angels.
So, first angels fallen, that's why the history emerged, like, this whole time is effectively an entropic time.
Emerging like the originally created world would be free of entropy.
Like, we don't know how it is, but some traditions effectively say that's what has happened.
And then there is a whole garden, and the whole Adam and Eve, falling.
And that's why it sounds even weird to a modern environment when we say, like, that even like, death is an outcome of sin.
Like, so that would be the most orthodox Christian understanding.
But it's another saying, the world is fallen, but you have will, reason, power to make it a better place while you're still waiting to the Christ.
That's a very important part.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, so, let me put two things out.
You have the notion of you should be patient.
But the root of that is to be a patient.
Which is the opposite of agent.
You have agent and patient.
Those are the complements.
They're complementary.
One is an agent, one is a patient.
The call, the Christian call is to be a patient, not to be patient.
The slippage is what happens when you take an agent and you say, wait.
Hold back your agency for some period of time.
To the English ear, when we say patient, we don't mean to become a patient.
We would not say to become an ontological transition to receptivity.
What we say is hold back your agency for some period of time.
Like a kid.
I want to go play.
Be patient.
Your will will be realized, but you have to hold it back.
I'm going to propose that that is a chasm.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
That is a tremendous chasm.
Second, the very ordinary experience.
My house, gets dirty over time.
And if I don't clean it, it will not clean itself.
This is very ordinary.
If I am told, and by the way, I can clean it.
This is also very important.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's a very important part.

**J.Hall:**
You can clean it.
I can clean it.
In fact, if I work with my wife and my daughter and we work together, we can actually clean it together in a way that is both easier and better

**P.Shchelin:**
and beautiful.

**J.Hall:**
So, there's a sleight of hand where we somehow get demoralized into believing that to be patient is to lack access to this form of beauty.
And so, in that sleight of hand, somebody comes along and says, but we can make the world a better place.
And now we're back into the story.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's why coming back into the story, but let's stay in the story you brought it up about this whole, because the second part of this, it's not just you can make the world a better place, and it's not even you should make it a better place, but it's all you can make.
That's the real trick of happiness.
That's all you have access to is cleaning your house.
And that's where the trick would have happened in this metaphor.
Like, that's the limit.
You're absolutely right how the vulnerability for this trick happens, and that, I think, is great.
Yeah, so it's not about patience.
It's a patience.
It's, yeah, it's even transcending this category.
Like, I used patience in a...

**J.Hall:**
We're trying to tease them hard, because these things live in the grammar.
They live in the language.
They live in these weird confusions where something is, like you said, the basement.
It becomes a blind spot that we've built on top of.
We've forgotten even what the bricks were that we used to get there.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, so the, like, when Christ was in ascension, it was not, he was not called to apostle to sit and do nothing.
Like, he told them, I will send you a spirit and go proselytize, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So it's very much away from being a, from being patient in the way you described.
But to their direct question, and it is a question, so when you will come back to which, let's say, secularize it in a modern way, when the world will be perfect.
Like, ultimately, when is this, when does the story end, when it's all great and good, and, like, when it's, like, when it's going to happen like this.
Give me precise timing.
In that sense, you need to be patient.
And that's the trick.
You need to do somehow, and that's what saints do.
You keep on moving, but you move with, without expectation and without a deadline.

**J.Hall:**
Exactly.
Which is, again, I am going to propose that this is the quality of being that the name patient, in the ontological sense, is.
And this is, I want to be subtle, what I think is that one of the confusions that has been wrought upon us, what is this called?
Lie.
The lie is that patient means nothing, or do nothing, in all, doing, lives in the category of agent.
And what you are saying, the saint, belies that.

**P.Shchelin:**
He is beyond this contradiction.

**J.Hall:**
He is beyond this contradiction, exactly.
He shows that, and we see this in the concept of freedom.
True freedom only lies in fully surrendering to God's will.
This is a very confusing thing to a modern mind.

**P.Shchelin:**
And we're going to talk about it.

**J.Hall:**
But this is the same idea.
It is the same idea.
And so, the fall, the fall is the moment where we find ourselves demoralized, by something about the nature of that contradiction and the challenge of transcending it, and tempted precisely into something that is easier to grab a hold of, and is a simulacrum of the real thing.
Yes.
This is both.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
But it creates the imperative.
And once the imperative is created, the story actually starts moving much faster.
Because once you are in this imperative, very shortly you came to the realization you don't need God at all in the picture.
The world is still broken, but it doesn't really matter why it is broken.
Right.
And, again, here is a big claim.
But I do think it's, on a deep level, it's still the statement, God, bad God created a bad world.
It's still an act of subconscious rebellion.
But, again, subconscious is a tricky topic, and I don't want to tell people what they think.
I'm just showing how this story manifests.
For example, let's say that in the stories, like, dialectic or the laws of nature, and we're just upholding them, and we're just moving them forward.
Or, like, it's an objective reality.
Currently, the world is built upon this bad, broken class system.
We can remake it, repurpose it if I go in a different direction.
The world is built on scarcity.
The scarcity is bad.
It's broken because it is scarce.
Let me find this underlying principle and fix it through this.
And that's actually a good point to bring it up.
Why Gnosticism?
Because what is...
We never talked about Gnostic effectively.
It's an idea of Gnosis.
It's a knowledge.
So, how it connects.
There is some kind of brokenness, but there is a knowledge to fix it.
And you are the one to use this knowledge to fix it.

**J.Hall:**
So, it's in the direction of, say, the occult, meaning...

**P.Shchelin:**
Like, it's reason, but simultaneously, it is occult.

**J.Hall:**
There's a secret.
A secret to reality that you...
Those who are not in on the secret are...

**P.Shchelin:**
Are blind to it.
Are blind.

**J.Hall:**
And sometimes, it's...
How do you say?

**P.Shchelin:**
Not awakened?

**J.Hall:**
Subordinate, or even enslaved by their blindness.
You, perhaps, can become one of those who is awakened to it.
And here's the secret.
The world is broken.
There is something at the root of the world, but there's the other secret, which is very interesting, which is that somehow, those who can see that secret can fix it.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
And, in fact, must.

**P.Shchelin:**
And, in fact, must.
Yeah.
And that would not be possible, like, why it is important.
Like, it would not be truly possible for the original Gnostics, because they didn't have this optimism.
But it's possible once you experience a Christian.
So, it is an ape of Christianity.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Yeah, I can see it almost, like, as a rearguard action of the serpent.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, it's pretty crafty.
I don't know how I'm going to give a credit when it's due.
Because, such a tempting challenge.
Like, and it makes sense.
Yeah.
And we will talk about this later, but it makes sense.
Yeah.
If you make the assumption that the world, that if you forget that in Genesis the world is good, if you forget the beginning, and that's why it is the first stage.
If you forget that in the beginning, he made the world as good, and saw that it is good.
He didn't saw it as flawed.
He didn't saw it as bad.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
So, another name that I'm playing with for this world of Gnostic civilization is the Luciferian Gospel.

**P.Shchelin:**
Effectively, yes.

**J.Hall:**
The Gospel lands.
Now, Satan's in trouble.
But he has a move.
He knows that among people the right move is to always tell a particular quality of lie that captures an image of the truth and provisions it in a way that a part of the human can grasp and feel real, real power?
I don't know.
What is it?
It is,

**P.Shchelin:**
well, it is power.
It is knowledge.
It is pride.
What you said, like, a saint once said that any heresy is taking apart and as a whole.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
And that's

**P.Shchelin:**
what it is.
Because there is some brokenness in this world.
It's not fly.
Like, and it would be absolutely lie, let's say, to come to a broken person and to tell him, no, the world is rainbow and perfect and, like, there is no suffering.
Like, come to a mother of a sick child and tell her this story.
So, and

**J.Hall:**
of course, the most powerful version of that is to take a virtue and tell the virtue that by being itself it is the whole.
Yes.
So, we want to go to reason and say, reason, you and you alone can save the world.
Courage, you and you alone.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's a second conversation.
Just a heads up those of you, but yeah.
But even the brokenness.
The real trick, I think, though, like, if we're speaking about what is my understanding of the true distinguishing between two views, it is a distinction between internal and external.
The phrase, the world is broken, quote, quote, liberates you from your responsibility in a way, from your spiritual, ethical, true ethical responsibility.
It is the world that is broken, not you.

**J.Hall:**
Certainly it allows that move.

**P.Shchelin:**
At least it allows this move.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Which then means you will take it, we should say.
It's not the same move.
It allows the move and you'll take it.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
If you reach this point, most probably you cannot take it.
It works in a very interesting way.

**J.Hall:**
Ah, yes.
I've been there.
I know this exactly.
Exactly.

**P.Shchelin:**
How it works a little bit psychologically, like, and where is the seed of truth?
So, we arrive, like, and this is, I want to reference a guy I didn't saw in a long reference, it's this Russian philosopher called Nismelov from the late 19th century, not widely known, but effectively he'd written a book A Science of a Man.
But what he points out is true, that there is indeed in any human, and it's what kind of drives all movement in us, this urging feeling that we are not exactly what we should be.
Like, I'm not yet fully me.
And all movement is effectively this process of expansion of a human.
Like, it's me trying to grow into me, which is simultaneously expansion and going in and going out in the same time.
Somehow it works.
Like, it's a paradox, but it's the way it works.
So, what happens?
Why is the trick happens?
It is true.
We all have this feeling that there is something is off.
We all have this nudging feeling that is off.
But the trick comes.
It's not about you.
It's about the world.
It's about the laws of dialectics.
It's about the laws of society.
It's about the laws of nature.
It's about this.
It's about that.
It's not about your heart.
It's about literally anything else but your heart.
And you have a knowledge but you feel this inadequacy.
You have this tension.
Here is the knowledge to fix this tension.

**J.Hall:**
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
So, this is the how do you say?
Let's take it step by step.
So, obviously everybody who plays in the technological world participates in this to some extent.
And again, there's a simple seduction, which is that somebody invented that bottle.
And there was an objective error in reality, which is it's hard to carry water in your hands.
And Nessie.
So, somebody invented a bottle and it worked.
And the world became better.
Okay.
So, here's the problem.
You can always do that.
You can always say, hey, it is really the case that there are objective problems in the objective world and they are subject to objective solutions and it actually makes things better.
Which is all true.
So, this then becomes for certain kinds of people.
I'm not sure if it's all people, but for certain kinds of people, people like me becomes a very seductive addiction because I have a high degree of efficacy in the objective and a profound lack in the subjective.
To put it another way, I have a lot in the head and not so much in the heart.
Certainly by the age of 10.

**P.Shchelin:**
Perfect example.
And let's see how a story came to manifest as actually something which surrounds all of us cities.
Let's plan a city.
Let's design a city.
Let's design it the most effective according to our current knowledge.
And that's why you have beautiful cities which were not designed and very efficient but pretty ugly cities when you design them.
And it's not to say that design is bad, but it is this excess which you draw.

**J.Hall:**
So then you get this interesting build over time.
Layers.
Those who are the most strategic, which is a combination of intelligence and agency.

**P.Shchelin:**
Both.
Say will.

**J.Hall:**
I wouldn't agree.
And will.
Yeah, sure.
Intelligence, agency, and will.
They discover.
What is it?
Give a man a fish.
Teach a man a fish.
Oh, nice.
Build the university called Fishing Sciences and everybody can fish.
So not just the men.
Which is a strategic move.
How do I make change in the world?
How do I make the world a better place with more leverage?
How do I make more good actually happen?
Well, I can fill up your water bottle or I can carry more water in my hands.
Okay, well, that's stupid.
I can build the water bottle.
Okay.
I can build a bottling factory that taps it.
Oh, okay.
There's something that's happening there.
Now, iterate this generation after generation.
Those who orient themselves towards the heart maybe actually make very important success for two or three people.
Those who orient themselves after the head, a small number, but enough, make durable, significant, I mean, the word significant, significant.

**P.Shchelin:**
And durable also.

**J.Hall:**
Visible.
Visible.
Or to use cognitive science language, salient.
I can look at it and say, clean water for lots of people.
I can hang my hat on that.
So the next generation comes and they look around.
It becomes increasingly self-evident.
Effective agency, doing things right, making the world a better place, participating as a human being in the world, consists either of something like foolishness, at the very local level, at the heart level, or intelligence, at the level of what is the most effective strategic maneuver that has the highest leverage to produce the highest good for the highest number.
I mean, even using the what is it called?
The language, the particular spellcasting of a whole subculture.
Absolutely.
Effective altruism.

**P.Shchelin:**
Effective altruism.
Creative destruction.
That's actually my favorite one, but like something called the sword, but absolutely right.
And it unfolds.
It unfolds to a point to a very dangerous point.
And I think ultimate dangerous point, which we will go into later, but this subject-object relationship, it's very easy to start seeing a fellow man as an object.

**J.Hall:**
In part, increasingly necessary.

**P.Shchelin:**
And oh, that's increasingly necessary.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
Absolutely.
Maybe we used this in previous conversation, but I just call this society.
Society is a context of human relationships where your relationships are always mediated by something that is not human and therefore always puts the other as an object.
I know this when I went to go buy coffee the other moments ago.
I used a medium called money to cause another human being to have to do what I wanted them to do without asking any real questions about who I was or why I wanted coffee.
Give me the coffee.
Go.

**P.Shchelin:**
And very efficient.

**J.Hall:**
And very efficient.
Lots of coffee.

**P.Shchelin:**
Actually, very good.
Very good coffee.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Utility.
My utiles were very high.

**P.Shchelin:**
But I hope you guys see where the danger lies.
How this trick necessarily in the end will lead to pretty scary pitch.

**J.Hall:**
Well, we'll probably spend some time teasing out that necessities because I assure you that it is not obvious to most.

**P.Shchelin:**
Okay.
That's a good point.
Another final point I really wanted to bring is a great story which actually we don't really compare them often.
How the difference between two worldviews, between broken world and broken heart, effectively.
So there is a famous story of St.
Augustine's Confessions.
How he remembers how he has stolen a pear in a garden.
And how it leads to him to hold the liberation confession, like change of heart, effectively.
And because it is effectively the first diary put on a paper in literature tradition, we can still experience it.
Like anybody who read Augustine's Confession notices this whole...
It's a very powerful scene.
Anybody who didn't read it, I highly encourage, go and read it.
But effectively, he accepts responsibility.
He accepts the change of heart.
He talks with the God.
He talks with the Spirit.
So that's the story.
That's what we call the Orthodox story.
Well, there is effectively a very parallel story written in Enlightenment time by Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
When he mediates on how he's stolen a basket of asparagus.
And what he came to, let's say, effectively, it's...
Well, it wasn't just me.
It wasn't really me.
It was like, you know, objective laws of causality.
They led to this.
It was effectively the cruel society which made me do this thing.
But it was not about me.
And that's what actually you will necessarily have in a world of efficiency.
It's not about you.
It's not about me.
It's not about us.
It's about something we didn't tweak right.
Or somebody who with the knowledge didn't tweak right.
Somebody who is not possessing the right theory.
The same semantic structure works in the classical story of dialectics.
Like those who realize dialectics now have a duty to change the world according to the laws of dialectics and could make everyone happy.
That's the natural of communist manifesto.
The same story about liberal principles.
Those who realize the truth about, let's say, the human nature according to the teachings of, let's say, Locke, Hobbes, and other guys.
Or like, that's the true, like, that's what the true meaning of human is.
Now you have a rule to spread democracy and capitalism to the whole world.
And it is a sacred duty.
Notice how also it becomes a sacred duty.
That's also very interesting.
You can't just, once you see this knowledge and this story, you have to act outwardly.
Whereas in the broken heart, once you see your broken heart, you have to act inwardly.

**J.Hall:**
So there's one arrow towards the truth and two arrows towards the lie.
The arrow towards the truth is you are in fact objectively improving the world in certain ways.
We have to be careful with that.
It's very important because we don't know how the world works very well.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's another very important point.

**J.Hall:**
The arrow towards the lie is this notion of pushing agency into the objective.
And then the other one with regard to the broken heart is then pushing repentance to therapy and coping.
So I, as Rousseau, I rationalize into the objective or I cope in the subjective.
And some combination of rationalization and cope then causes me to be able to be in the contradiction, in the reality that I'm actually not really living in reality.
And then I can convince myself to participate in this movement that has this ability to, ah, you can see it, it's such a sad thing.
How can I actually be effective in the world now?
Now I'm now very narrowly focused on a very narrow path, which is I participate in this machine in society.

**P.Shchelin:**
If I'm low, I only discuss.
If I'm high, I create a machine that fixes, which makes, no one else ever makes such a choice.
Let's give everybody a basket of asparagus.

**J.Hall:**
Ah.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
Which is to take the highest status position in society.
And maybe even at the highest level, like a Napoleon, to take a position which is proximal to actually participating in reality.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
And that's place.
And that's just to summarize, like, not summarize, just to bring it finally close to the home and we do it all the time.
The moment I say, my goal is to make a world a better place, I'm already playing this game.
Yeah.
The moment my goal is to make this better, like, already has a danger in it.
Let's say, not always.
You can, but it already has a danger in it.
Because truth be told, it shouldn't be your motivation.
Like, not shouldn't be, like, that's another tricky part, and that's where I will leave it as it is, but the only real, real trick to avoid falling into this trap is not ever setting up a goal to make a world a better place.
You might make it a better place as an accident, but not as a goal.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Yeah.
And just to say, there's, again, a number of different pieces.
One is this notion of the world.
Don't make the world a better place.
You can make your house a better place.
Right?
You can make your sandwich a better sandwich.
Feel free.
Run.
As soon as you try to step into making the world a better place, you've stepped into something.

**P.Shchelin:**
You've stepped into something.

**J.Hall:**
It's as big and confusing, so you better watch out.
Get out quick.

**P.Shchelin:**
Kind of get out quick.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
And then, as you do that, you'll begin to notice that you're also then avoiding, ah, that's so, you're avoiding repentance and replacing it with rationalization and therapy.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
We will talk about later why you have to, but I think it's a good place to make a stop.

**J.Hall:**
Okay.
