# Universal Table Part II - The Spitit of Supra | John Heers

April 23, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KooNHgEgkSs) 45:20

In the second part of Universal Table, Pavel and John discuss the mystery of the Third — the invisible link, the spirit, the highest thing that is only present through vulnerability.

**J.Heers:**
what you start to realize is is this table is unique these 20 people are unique but also not really yeah and that's what tradition is that's what it is you are unique but also you should pay attention because these people have already done this super huge heresy for

**P.Shchelin:**
a modern time you are not that special i didn't even think about it you're right

**J.Heers:**
because you're not but you are that's the tricky part but why why do we emphasize that you are a

**P.Shchelin:**
part um i want to go back to vulnerability like because what we did right now truth be told it's pretty vulnerable if you think about it we toast it on camera like yeah no let's be honest uh it already has this tricky why the table is universal why is wine or liquor is involved but traditionally wine let's say wine is a symbolism of all good liquor around a good table because it does increase vulnerability you become more vulnerable when you drink especially when you drink in public uh why would why would one risk this interesting part good question good question many people would say well don't risk it at all like just don't for sure and i can see in some context maybe for some people it's good not to risk but if you're making the not risking itself an idol like horror falls god then you end up in this pretty lonely boring culture yeah loneliness and spirit it becomes puritanical becomes puritanical and what is the tricky part we talked a lot you already brought vulnerability and let's build upon it because vulnerability is one of the inescapable tragedies of human condition we are vulnerable the problem is i don't know as a person and as a philosopher any good thing which can flourish or simply exist without vulnerability yeah vulnerability is not just a byproduct it's a necessary condition for any trust for any invisible link vulnerability is a necessary condition for any unity with the spirit i'm sorry i will raise it up a little bit here that's nice you brought your story about opening the restaurant and why why the table is universal but because any anything you do anything any unity like any project any deed is actually build upon face it and faces vulnerability it's about trusting that in the unpredictable uh let's see space of the future like not truly predictable i will come we lie to ourselves a lot here but in many ways uh in an unpredictable ocean of the future uh my relationship with with something bigger than me and with other people will produce something good, will let me be.
Table makes you face it.

**J.Heers:**
Can I take this?
Please.
And tell a story?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, that's what I'm here for.

**J.Heers:**
I'm gonna tell a story.
To understand the story fully, just, we had a table, I was the Tamada, and it was a group of women.
It was about 30 women, maybe 25 women.
They came in on fire and it was gonna be great.
And things were wonderful.
And they made the restaurant, they beautified the restaurant with their young, beautiful selves, all dressed up.
And they sat down and I was ready to do Supra and I started trying to explain.
And three of the women came up to me on the side and they said, oh, John, I was here.
Tamada, thank you for doing this.
We're so excited.
It's my friend's birthday, whatever her name.
I don't remember, Stacy, let's say.
And two of us were at this before and we know how Supras go.
So this is gonna be the best thing we're gonna do this night ever.
But we really need you to not do that one toast where you toast to those dead people.
And I was like, well, okay, but it's a Supra.
And I can get into the history because that toast is actually essential.
It's essential.
It's essential because that's how the Supra started in Georgia.
So I said, well, you gotta trust me on this.
And they said, no, you don't understand.
Our friend whose birthday it is, you see, it's very practical.
She is suffering this week because her father died only a week ago.
And we just had to bury him and we didn't wanna cancel it.
And it's her birthday.
Please don't make her think of this.
And I said, no, no, you have to trust me.
This is why we need to do the toast.
And then another girl said, you don't understand.
We paid for this.
She went to like the most practical.
And she made me the most, she's trying to voice like, a deep, like Western vulnerability on me, like dough, money, I'm gonna risk money.
And I just looked at her and I had this really important choice to make.
And it was early on in our existence as a restaurant.
And I don't, I just remember thinking, and I told her, look, girl, I can't do that.
I didn't even have words anymore to try to explain what was gonna happen.
You just gotta trust me.
She had to be vulnerable.
She wasn't, she was pissed off.
And she walked away with her friends and sat down and we started to do the super and then you know what happened.
I know.
Because you're a human being.
And also maybe I even told you this story.

**P.Shchelin:**
I've been to many super species.

**J.Heers:**
You can get what happened.
And everybody on the camera watching right now, when I give you the answer, if you don't know what happened, you do know what happened.
You're not thinking clearly, or you're not allowing your being to surpass your thinking.
What happened was, is we toasted to her dead father.
Which was the best thing that I ever had.
What could be better than that?
Ignoring her dead father?
Like, just think about it on a scale of one to 10.
Which one's cool?
Of course you have to toast to the father that just died.
And you know what?
That's universal.
It is universal.
And when we did it.

**P.Shchelin:**
The super began.

**J.Heers:**
Oh, you got it.
It began.
Each, her friends started to tell stories about her father.
I'm about to get emotional now.
And then you know what happened?
They came up after me and said this was the best night ever.
And they hugged me and then we all took pictures.
And you know what I wanted to do?
I wanted to go, why are you trying to put that on me like that?
With dollars, why are you trying to do that thing?
Why are you trying to do that?

**P.Shchelin:**
Because that's what we're trying to do.

**J.Heers:**
Why, why?
Well, I mean, I got answers, but what's your answer?
Why'd she do that?

**P.Shchelin:**
Because we're trying to do that.
The only way to deal with the unpredictability of the future.
Right.
Is to make a deal.
Chaos.
No, is to make a deal.
And that's why we build institutions.
And to an extent, we all do it.
Because that's the tricky part.
Like we have institutions, we have a law, like Christians here, law, like all the talks about law.
But the very idea why we have law is precisely because this, to face this black ocean of something which you can predict because you know what will happen, but you are not certain

**J.Heers:**
of what will happen.
That's good.
That's good.

**P.Shchelin:**
But it is important.
I will stand here because what we want to do, it's not just knowing, it's certainty.
And knowing with certainty is replacement of faith because faith is built on trust and trust built on vulnerability and vulnerability necessarily presupposes, as a boring word, logical opportunities, the possibility of things go wrong.
You can understand it as the story of the fall.
Why God gave us a capacity to sin?
Because to keep the freedom.
Like it's a capacity to sin.
But to be able to do good, you must have a capacity to sin.
It doesn't mean you will use it, but you must have a capacity.
I see.

**J.Heers:**
And so there has to be a capacity, a potential for the thing you're certain about to not actually come true.
You need that uncertainty in order to live a proper life.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, but it's actually scary.
Like imagine like you're actually giving, like was there, let's say a possibility that giving this toast for the dead in front of this girl will lead to her, I don't know, emotional collapse.
Breakdown, awkward silence, Supra falling apart.
Again, you from your experience, and because you trust the spirit of Supra, which is in my opinion, connected to Holy Spirit, you know it's not, but technically it exists, but they don't know.
And here is this trust builds over time.
That's why any good relationship, like we know, we just know around this, we sit at this table right now because we know each other for two years.
It took many tables for us virtually to be at this table, truly to be at this table.
Yeah.
It's like instant podcasting, but even feeling it right now, very different.
It is.

**J.Heers:**
And we're going to do Supra tonight.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
And we're going to do Supra tonight.
But it takes time.
Time creates trust.
And faith is the only antidote against.

**J.Heers:**
Can I speak about that for a second?
So I've done.

**P.Shchelin:**
But anyway, that's my hypothesis.

**J.Heers:**
By the way, that's beautiful.
And it's also true.
And that uncertainty to me, I don't know, I was given a gift by my parents or through experience.
I like it.
I think it's an entertainer's gift that I don't know what's going to happen.
It's a stage and it could go crazy and it could go wrong.
There's something exciting about that for me.
I get it.
And I think that's one reason that Tamadas are Tamadas is because they're like, well, let's see what happens.
I think.

**P.Shchelin:**
I think.
Yes.
But also like to an extent, obviously, there are errors in your life where you don't know.
You don't want this at all.
Of course.
I can bet.
So like and for some people, this area is the table.
But that's why a table is universal.
It actually builds up your stamina.
It builds you up.
You can face maybe the truth, which as a person about you thinks is a compliment and you always hate it in yourself.
You might be able you might need to face it.
But if you go through it, it will bring up trust.
It will bring up more of you.
And that's in truth is the only way forward.
Problem is we don't do it.
And as a practice, as a social institution, as the whole world around us is built on precisely opposite principle.
It's built on protocol.

**J.Heers:**
That's what I was going to say is so I've done a lot of these tables, tables with strangers who sit together and tables with friends from for years that sit together.
And it's really interesting.
Everyone thinks, oh, when all the friends are together, they can they speak freely with each other.
It's not really true.
Because what the Tamada is doing.
There's a canon of meaning.
It's not a canon of toasts.
In other words, you're not it's you're not repeating toasts that you did.
It's not like every super has the same toasts.
This is weird.
The Tamada actually shouldn't repeat himself on any given like tonight.
You you should hear themes.
Maybe tonight you'll hear toast the children or.
Yeah, of course.

**P.Shchelin:**
No, you know, the teams.

**J.Heers:**
But the idea is, is if you hear my same toast again, I've probably gotten lazy as a Tamada.
I've.
I'm trying to skirt the poem.
You know, the poetry.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, come on.
Well, let's be honest.
Everybody has their favorite toast.
But I do.
Yeah.
But obviously, the idea is it's not a stage performance because I mean, the faces of truth.
And that's a good part.
Like on a special level, it would be a mistake.
Oh, sorry.
It's a little bit off top.
But if you let me.
Sure.

**J.Heers:**
I'll get back to this.

**P.Shchelin:**
I just want to do a quick dig into potential conservative audience because I want to hear

**J.Heers:**
this.
I like this.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because it's.
Your example on toast is a perfect representation because, like, for example, the reason I don't call myself conservative is because conservatism necessary is about keeping the form in case of table.
It would be like you have a list of toast and you have a list of exact 14 COVID toasts and every super you do this toast.
And what is truly the very first time you do it?
It might have been the most best, amazing supra.
Problem is, if you only do it.
And if you start worshiping.
This exact phrases, this exact words, it will end up being hollow.
You will lose the meaning.
And why?
Because table change.
That's one of the problem with the vulnerability.
Vulnerability is our reaction to the change.
And any change has a potentiality of danger.
Legitimately.
Sure.
Ultimately, change results in death.
Like I'm just saying, like, all change leads to death.

**J.Heers:**
I feel when I wake up these days, I'm like, death is happening.
I feel great.
I feel I don't feel well.
I'm older.
I'm getting older.

**P.Shchelin:**
So, and in that sense, conservatism is understandable, but also a little bit childish desire.
If I just keep the form right, it will save me from facing the change.
Well, the good Tamada is actually to help people face the change and table is for Tamada, his personal way of facing the change.
And that's why it's universal.
We all face these problems.
We all face the change.
Well, you have two potential members.
The conservative mistake is to sacralize the form, sacralize the order of toast, make a toast holy, like effectively.

**J.Heers:**
Right.
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Liberal answer would be let's basically just get rid of Tamada.
Let's not.

**J.Heers:**
Let's do it.
Let me express it the way I want to express it.

**P.Shchelin:**
Let me express it the way I want to express it.
Just the way.
This is my table.
This is mine.
I paid.
I paid for it.
That's right.

**J.Heers:**
Now I'm going to.
I'll do my toasts.
Any Tamada knows.
No, no, no, no, no.
I'm doing their toasts.
I'm doing the toasts for this table.
And what comes to be true, and this is what's so cool about the tradition.
And that's why.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's tradition.

**J.Heers:**
It's just why we're trying to give it to Americans.
The coolest, the most beautiful thing about the tradition is what you start to realize is this table is unique.
These 20 people are unique, but also not really.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's what tradition is.

**J.Heers:**
That's what it is.

**P.Shchelin:**
You are unique.
But not really.

**J.Heers:**
Also, you should pay attention because these people have already done this.
And you're not that different.

**P.Shchelin:**
Do you understand that you just said basically a super huge heresy for a modern time?
You are not that special.
What?

**J.Heers:**
I didn't even think about it.
You're right.
Because you're not.

**P.Shchelin:**
But you are.
But that's the tricky part.

**J.Heers:**
But why do we emphasize that you are a part?
I guess it's just an imbalance through history, right?
It's a type of adoption of a certain type of being, a certain type of God.
And we followed this, the I am my own God.
By the way, it's okay.
Because you are unique.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's what I'm saying.

**J.Heers:**
This is the weird part, right?

**P.Shchelin:**
I would say the weird part is you are way less unique than you think you are.
And that's the job of Tamada a little bit, that you are way more unique than you ever thought you are.

**J.Heers:**
You're infinitely unique.

**P.Shchelin:**
You're infinitely unique than you thought you are.
The problem is we put emphasis traditionally on different parts because I'm still coming back to vulnerabilities.
There's a desire not to be.
There's a desire not to feel vulnerable.
If you remember-

**J.Heers:**
So let me tell you about these tables.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
Back to the table.

**J.Heers:**
So often we get, and by the way, I want everybody who's listening to call me.
Because if people are trying to unite, let's call it diverse groups, there's nothing better than Supra.
Oh yeah.
The problem is it makes people uncomfortable, which is great.
Business Supras are difficult.
You know what I mean?
Of course.
Oh, I really love this idea.
Someone comes in and they go, this is fantastic.
And I work at this insurance company and every year we do something, it's so dumb, a trust fall.
I don't really think everyone should come here and do Supra.
And I always go like this.
They should.
Absolutely.
Not just because I want them to come because it's amazing, but man, watching the American ethos about business that don't tell people your personal, like don't share the personal details of your life.
Don't share your vulnerabilities with your coworkers.
And the reason all the leaders want their businesses like Michelin to come to Supra is because at the office, no one's sharing their vulnerabilities, which leads to a type of slow death.
I think.

**P.Shchelin:**
It does.
I can give you later insight.

**J.Heers:**
But those tables are hard, Pasha.

**P.Shchelin:**
Of course they are hard.
They're difficult.
Because you're doing the heresy.
You're doing the heresy.
Another heresy.

**J.Heers:**
I like that.

**P.Shchelin:**
You're doing the heresy.
I mean, no, I'm sorry.
Because if you think about...
Sorry.
Now do you get capital?
No.
Capitalism as a religion is based upon certain dogmas.
And one of the ultimate dogmas of capitalism is exactly there is no human, there is a service.
What is a dough?
Like dough is a material version of the service.
I don't care who.
There is no who.
And you can say, well, no, but really, no, ultimately, sorry.
If you look historically, structurally, the whole system is moving towards a number.
Because it's the most efficient.
Wow.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
I mean, it's the most efficient.

**J.Heers:**
That's dark, but people think this way.

**P.Shchelin:**
Here is the tricky part.
In the short run, and here is our problem of incapable of thinking long term, let's say all the modern capitalist practices, this franchising, contract employment, like basically trying to, let's say, I only need 10 minutes of your time a day, so let me pay only for 10 minutes of your day and not...
So reduce yourself not even to the function, but to the function in a very particular time function.
So I'm only paying you for the time of your function or something of the sort.
So it's all going this way.
So what it means, it's completely a movement of who.
So ideally, let algorithm and AI do all of it.
Sorry.
That's the dream of all businessmen.
Can I just not pay for any labor?
Right.

**J.Heers:**
That's what's happening.

**P.Shchelin:**
I would say for any dumb businessmen, here we come to the slow desk part later.
But it is right now.
So when you are bringing it, and you suddenly, okay, functions.
You're actually not functioning.
Functions, you are people.
Let's talk about who we actually...
Let's not even talk.
Talking would be one thing, because talking has a little bit this performative element and elevator pitch.
We have our cheats for it.
Let's show ourselves who we are.
So this whole unit of-

**J.Heers:**
Show is a great word.
It's the right verb.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
You might not even say anything, but people will see.
You can't hide it around the table.
But guess what?
You can't hide it in your life.
You think you can hide it behind your paycheck or- Exactly.
Excel sheet.
But you actually can't.
No.
That's the true part.
And the more you try, the more lonely you are, the sadder you are, ultimately, the more suicidal.
So it's a slow desk trip.

**J.Heers:**
It's what you're describing.
It's also what, if you go look at our restaurant comments, it's what people say.
They say something like, I really needed that.
It's therapeutic.

**P.Shchelin:**
Can attest to this.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.
And there's something like, what was that?
That happens a lot.
Right?
That happens a lot.
Like, what was that?
Like, what happened right there?
And you're like, no, we just did dinner.
And then I try to like not go, I try not to, I don't like to ruin Shvidoba, the piece of the table with a very mechanical explanation of what's happening.
But there is a mechanical explanation that is, that's undergirded by a spiritual reality.
And maybe we can talk about that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
Let's talk.
Okay.

**J.Heers:**
So I'll give you one that's super fascinating, right?
Is the Tamada.
So for people that don't know, the Tamada sits at the end of the table, sometimes in the middle, depending on how big the table is.
I sat in the middle recently for a big 40 seater and I'm mediating.
And so the Tamada is a mediator between heaven and earth and earth is symbolized in the food and heaven is symbolized in the wine, but be careful, not in the wine itself.
It's in the words that are offered for the wine.
Again, this is all Orthodox liturgy on some level, it's the image of all this.
But here's what's really, really, really cool is in the Georgian tradition, if you go up in the mountains, they don't do this so much anymore.
You and I have a drink, we'll do it the old fashioned way.
You and I have a drink and you'll see the spiritual unity with the material in a second.
You and I have a drink and there's food everywhere.
And the Tamada is now going through the process.
We have to offer the toast and the toast is offered, I'll do it, I'll do one, to innocence and to the innocence that resides within us because we were all children once and it's good to be innocent and may we remember from time to time.
I could go on and we make the toast and in the tradition, the old school, we would both finish this.
We don't have to, it's a little strong.
It's also not great, but we would finish it.
If you put it down empty and if you held yours right there in the tradition, if you held it.

**P.Shchelin:**
You won't continue, right?

**J.Heers:**
Right.
No, I'll continue.
I'll say to children and to the innocence and I would give something poetic and then I would drink.
You would just hold it.
Let's practice it.
So I'm drinking, but you're just, you're just like this.
Then I put it down empty and I say, oh, please, Pasha, please, I know you want my toast because you held it.
And then you would add words.
To my toast to innocence or children, maybe talk about your children and then you would drink to the end.
Now if there's 30 or 40 of us sitting here or 20 or 10, you see that everybody's glass is empty.
Well, yeah, maybe three other people held, maybe he held and she held.
Then we're finished.
And if people are still following what's happening is the whole table has emptied their glass and now you never pour your own wine.
Someone will, the Marikipe will pour for you or your neighbor will pour and they fill it again.
And guess what happens?
You should not drink wine again until, until I, the Tamada.
And when the Tamada speaks, and this is what's really cool about the unity of heaven and earth.
When the Tamada speaks, he's giving you access to earth by blessing it with the logos, the invisible meaning or the spirit of heaven.
And so I'm saying to you, now you can participate in earth because I've given the blessing of heaven.
And of course, this is how it works with Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, right?
The litany is followed by the amen and the amen is the evidence of the people, right?
The altar is the evidence of heaven and the people are evidence of earth and they're united in Christ.
This is happening at the table.

**P.Shchelin:**
Okay.
Two comments.
So like one comment, low and then go back a little bit higher.
First thing first, speaking in other words, what's happening around the Supra wall?
Like what does it, what does it do to people around it?
It reminds us about the truth, which we kind of, even in a religion's tradition, mostly forgotten.
What I mean is the following.
We kind of tend to think about religious life and religion.
Spiritual.
Spiritual reality as something where very confined.
So there is a special place for it.
It's called the church.
You do that.
You go there for one hour, maybe two, maybe two and a half if it's like super, you know, long, whatever.

**J.Heers:**
You're rushing guys.
Maybe you go a little longer.

**P.Shchelin:**
You maybe do it a little bit longer, but you know, sometimes it's whatever, but basically it's a special place.
So we think of spiritual as something which is alienated.
There is a place for sport.
There is a place for work.
There is a place for eating.
There is a place for marriage.
There is a place for religion.
Like these places have clear borders and they are all function based and I know what to do.
Well, what is happening around the Supra, you're actually bringing people to realizations that it works in the opposite.
There is a spiritual reality and then there are different phases of the spiritual reality.
You can't confine it.
Like that's the thing.
So even when you go to sports, you worship your sports clothes.
When you go to work, you worship your work clothes.
When you go to church, you may be the one time of the day you worship something right.
Maybe if you're like around the table, it reminds that we are called to worship correctly, rightly every moment of our life, even around something which is not in your face because of our misconceptions, religious.
And that's what I think is very important happening around the Supra.

**J.Heers:**
So on that note, another story.
Yeah.
So I've toasted many times with, this is in Georgia.
I've toasted many times with men in Georgia.
So it works like this.
Me and you see each other, I don't know, Andrew here, our lovely editor sees us and he sits down and then, oh, there's two guys, hey, look, it's Steve and Jim and they come sit down and then we go, let's get a bottle, don't worry, we get a bottle and then we get maybe cha-cha comes from wine because the idea is you drink around wine.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then we put it down, we pour and then here's the coolest part and this is right to your point is you may have just been talking about a cocaine deal you're about to make or all of us are talking about, man, that girl and it doesn't matter what we're talking, we're guys and I don't know, I've seen 18 year old kids do this, whatever they're talking about.
And one of the guys who sort of agreed to be Talmud, I will say, don't worry, one minute, one second, I want to hear about this girl, but first, maybe a little toast to our parents, let's not forget our parents.
And then you toast to your parents and then he goes back to whatever he was bad about to say and he's like, one second, don't forget, we have to thank God to our elders, to all of the ancients.
And then you'll be like, how are they going to keep going back to that cocaine deal?
And what happens is, is it mediates not only heaven and earth.
Yeah.
It reminds us of the highest things.

**P.Shchelin:**
Present.
Yes.
Like I think present.

**J.Heers:**
Present.
Exactly.
And when you do that, I'm not trying to say that it saves you from yourself, but it reminds you of the other self, the self you can become.
And I found it amazing, I was a young guy, I was single and I was toasting with young guys and it wasn't always the best stuff, but boy, I was saved many times, but I was also called to honor.
And when I left Georgia, that's what happened.
I came home and I was like, there's something honorable in that, I started doing it at home.
And basically it turned into this restaurant.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, yeah.
And the reason is like, again, it provides the context, like the other thing, like you are you, but you are you not on your own.
I think that's what I would put it this way.
Yeah.
And back to like heaven and earth, like a little bit what I wanted to say, like why Supra works and what we can learn about, like from it.
In every moment of our life, on my level as a self, on a family level, on a corporate level, et cetera, et cetera, coming back to trust, connect.
Any trust or any relationship between two can only be in the face at the face of a third.
So it's against the face of somebody.
I see.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
So it's me, you, but it's not just me and you.
It's not horizontal.
Yeah.
It's me and you.
Yeah.

**J.Heers:**
That's what that toast is doing.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
I'm a little bit trying to show it.

**J.Heers:**
I know.
I jump in like a crazy person.

**P.Shchelin:**
No.
Sorry.
So it's just exactly what is happening.
So no table would work like on a practical level.
And I saw it when it's just me and you.
If it's just me and you, it's not a table.
You can't do it.
It's negotiation at best.
Yeah.
That's right.
It's a fight, rivalry.
That's right.
But truth be told, in my experience, the reason tables work, in my opinion, it's impossible

**J.Heers:**
to have a table without a third.

**P.Shchelin:**
There will be some spirit around the table.
Yes.
It might not be the best spirit, but there will be some spirit.
That's so true.
But there will be some spirit.
But all reality is based on it.
Literally, take anything.
Take corporations.
The only reason people come to work is because there is a spirit.
There is something higher than them that unites them.
It might not be good.
That's right.
It might be the dough, as we're talking about, or the fear.
Like fear is a spirit of fear.
Unfortunately, people use it as a substitute for a good spirit, but it's still a spirit.
That's right.
And supra reminds you about spiritual reality, and from it, you can start being more open, seeing it around yourself.
Because I teach, so that's what I do mostly.
And it's good talking about the concept, so share me sharing a story.
So sometimes I do like group lectures, like let's say, so people come, we talk about some interesting topic, like I do presents.
But then I thought like how to make it truly special.
Because people go a long ways, they spend a lot of money, like you want it to be meaningful.
And let's be honest, interesting part, we live at the age, some teaching inside, where all the information is available.
That's the tricky part.
Like people don't really look for information.
And even when they are watching our videos, those who are, I know you are not looking for information.
You don't really want to know the mechanics of the supra or anything.
You're looking for something else.
And that's coming back to your elevator pitch.
So what you're looking for is the space, which we call the table.
So the piece or the Shvedoba around the table.
And the certain freedom and vulnerability of people communing with certain spirit, experiencing, seeing it.
That's what it is, yeah.
So long story short, we started doing supras at the end of the seminar.
You did?
Yeah, I did.
Like that's what I do now all the time.
And that's what seals it.

**J.Heers:**
How are they going?

**P.Shchelin:**
Going great.
Going great.
Like they're going wonderful.
And it is very humbling because yes, I know, like I can tell interesting stories.
Like I teach interesting stuff.
But to them truly change someone's heart, one needs to, not needs to, it's much deeper meaning when then a personal relationship against the face of the spiritual reality comes into play.

**J.Heers:**
So can I just say, this is what we're trying to do.
So like there's the do part.
Now let's just talk about do first.
Okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
Let's talk about the right do.
Can I do?

**J.Heers:**
I'm going to do right do.
Do do.
I got to do this.
I want to talk about this.
What's happened is the thing that we started doing, which is aid work, in the world called America aid work or international aid is giving to poor people in poor countries what they need.
That's not what we do.
Mm-hmm .
Mm-hmm .
It started as supra elongated and turned into two years of offering yourself in the poorest neighborhoods by living simply right alongside at a table.
It's simply mud huts, no car, living the life of those where we were invited to work.
And that meant eating with them.
And so out of this experience of doing projects around the world, the project is the person who goes by the way.
Mm-hmm .
The poor person.
That's not the project.
We go because we're trying to heal.
We sit and commune.
And then out of the communion comes projects.
This is a very Orthodox Christian way to do missionary work.
So what I'm telling you is that's what First Things is.
That's what we do.
But what happened was it was successful.
I don't know if it's super successful.
I know it's beautiful.
Mm-hmm .
Beauty's a kind of ...
Mm-hmm .

**P.Shchelin:**
How do you measure success?

**J.Heers:**
It's a pretty good metric.
I'll take that.
The stories are magnificent and the people are transformed.
But this restaurant came about when we tried to say, this is who we are, let's have offices.
That didn't work.
We opened a restaurant.
Now, guess what we're doing?
And I didn't know it until really in the last year.
We're sharing what happens over there in Mozambique and Sierra Leone and Guatemala, which is they come and they take a piece of the material reality that we can offer.
We help them with resources.
Mm-hmm .
And we've learned about the spiritual reality that that kind of tight-knit community offers.
And what we realize is we don't need money here.
We need communion.
Mm-hmm .
And then people are like, well, I'm a Baptist.
I'm not going to commune with an Orthodox.
That's the first thing.
And they're like, whoa, whoa.
I don't ...
You go to your church, I go to mine.
But the table has proven, and this is a gift from the Georgians.
Mm-hmm .
We'll always say this.
This has nothing to do with America whatsoever.
It's a gift from the Georgian.
Mm-hmm .
From the depths of the Georgian liturgy.
From behind the iconostasis where Vakhtang was buried, deep in mystical Georgia, somehow we've been given a task of sharing the universal table with every human we can.
So we have PDFs, we do courses.
We're trying to create tamadas.

**P.Shchelin:**
You're doing a successful job.
And we're trying.

**J.Heers:**
This is it.

**P.Shchelin:**
But the reason it's working, I think, as you said, it's ...
Okay, you brought the word.
Yeah.
Which was in my head, the gift part.
The interesting part, it's the gift from Georgia, like in your story.
But the reason it works, because it was given to them.

**J.Heers:**
Well, this is good.
Thank you for that.

**P.Shchelin:**
And ...

**J.Heers:**
Don't tell you that.
Uh-huh .
No.

**P.Shchelin:**
But that's the true nature of anything, everything.
Like you brought before, it's like the good tamada, the bad tamada.
Here, the gift part, surprisingly, is a great bridge to mention another universal element.
The universal element in any table, which we completely, in my opinion, misunderstand.
The nature of power, because obviously tamada is a certain figure of power, right?
You have ...
Big time.
Big time.
For sure.
You stand.
You raise the glass.
You drink.
Everybody drinks when you say.
Ultimately.
And not when they want to drink in Georgian tradition.
So you would imagine it.
You would imagine it pretty high.
Like it makes you feel pretty mighty, one would think.

**J.Heers:**
It can.
For sure.

**P.Shchelin:**
A hundred percent.
It can.
Well, the trick is if you start feeling this way, the table will start falling apart.

**J.Heers:**
I've seen it.
It's my own eyes.

**P.Shchelin:**
But why?
Well, it's the same reason, let's say, if you have a beautiful tradition, like some super tradition, cause a table tradition, it's a particular way of doing table.
It's only beautiful because it's a snippet of something.
It's something bigger than you have it.
And so the power of tamada is way bigger than any tamada.
The moment you start thinking that you can keep this power for yourself, that the moment you can think that you can control this power to yourself, it starts falling apart.
So what I mean, everything is a gift.
And it is a philosophical category.
So any property of yours, characteristic, mind, eyes, ears, age, health, wisdom, knowledge, tradition, was given to you.
I'm sorry for the culture of self-accomplishment, I know it sounds horrible, but even your capacity to read a book is a gift.
All is a gift.
But if everything is a gift, then power is a gift as well.
So there is such a thing as a gift of power.
We don't think about it.
We think about power as a contract.
In one case, I saw power as like a product of my will.
I have this power because I willed it.
Sorry, I need a chance.
No.
But they do think it.
But I will say, it's a very common tradition and we can see very dark places it goes.
We recently had a pretty big story, exactly, like if you know why the really dark islands exist, well, that's because of it.
Because we think about-

**J.Heers:**
I've heard about that.
Yes, but that's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's because we think that power is out of myself.
I myself create the power.
And then you can even start beneficial, but you will inevitably end up on that island.

**J.Heers:**
You'll end up on the island and you'll do things you can't imagine because you've become your own god.

**P.Shchelin:**
You'll become your own god.
But alternatively, like let's say, well, we don't need any power.
Well, in a way, on some level, maybe no, but only if you submit to the absolute highest power.
So no, you still need power because stable needs some structure.
Even if it's like invisible structure, it's still a structure.
You know, in Orthodox tradition, even heavens have their hierarchy.

**J.Heers:**
Well, this is the idea that when we kiss the priest's hand, you're kissing the priest's hand because the priest is handling communion.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
And it has nothing to do with the priest.
His power is not, his power is actually, it goes through him.

**P.Shchelin:**
Exactly.
And it would be horrible for a priest to start thinking that you're kissing his hand.
Good priests are- But it's a temptation.
It is a temptation.
Temptation.
It is a temptation, which is real, but the way to deal with it, like at least that's what I read.
Like in Holy Fathers, effectively, it's exactly passing it forward.
And that's going back to the gift.
So the reason this tradition of yours works, so there is something universal.
And that's the truth.
There is truly something universal.
And Orthodox people have a name for it, Christ.
Christ is universal.
So it's not just something, it's someone.
And then everything good, effectively, is of him.
But it comes through different people, through different cultures, through different traditions, through different faces.
The faces of it can be passed forward.
So these energies can be passed forward.
And if any, basically, long story short, if any powerful person, if any powerful leader, in my opinion, not even powerful, any person of power, and here is a trick, we are all people of power, either on a level of myself or a level of my family, a level of my business.
Maybe somebody is a level of a country.
I don't know who's going to listen to this.
You want to do it honorably, try to be a good tamada with people who owe nothing to you.

**J.Heers:**
There's a man who taught me how to do this.
One of them.
There were many.
It was Mamuka.
He had leprosy.
His nose was falling off.
And he would do this thing at the end.
I don't know that every tamada does this.
I do it now.
We do it in the restaurant.
So it's mostly men.
This is in 94, 95.
It's mostly dark.
There's no electricity.
And toiling away are usually women in the kitchen.
This is in the countryside.
It's not really Tbilisi anymore.
You can find women tamada.
But during all my time, there was never a woman tamada.
But what would happen, it was really beautiful, is this was a powerful tamada.
He spoke like he meant it.
And people liked him.
Like a true king.
Really.
And at that time, he was like...
It was almost like a gangster.
A gangster boss.
It was like, this is for...
And so...
But he would always, toward the end, he would say, please, to the women, he would bring them out.
It was really nice.
And he would say, this table, this table, so much has been given to us.
I don't even know who made this.
Where did the wood...
Who grew the wood?
Who cut the wood?
But today we have her.
This is my aunt or my mother or my...
This is Kakaladze's friend.
And then he would go and...
He would kiss the hand of the chef, of the women.
Not all of them, maybe, but he would go and honor them by kissing their hand.
And this is resplendent.
And it's also in the image of the priest, who's bowing as an act of ownership of his power.
He bows before the others and then kisses the true hand.
Or in other words, he demonstrates where the real power lies.
And it's so beautiful.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's what we forgot.
Because notice what happened right now.
We talked about concept of power without ever mentioning oppression or subjugation.
Right.
And notice that that's literally the only language we think.
The whole debate about power is structured this way.

**J.Heers:**
Always.

**P.Shchelin:**
Always.
The problem is the whole debate is false.
I often have it as a problem, like, many people, what do you think about this matter and this matter?
And many tables fall, like, you know, like how political subjects are usually the reason we like falling.
Like, it's like all falls apart usually.
But in my opinion, it's because the very language of it is unfortunately not right.
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
We have it upside down.

**P.Shchelin:**
We have it upside down.
Because we don't accept the third.
That's what I'm talking about.
We don't accept the third.

**J.Heers:**
That's correct.
We've forgotten the third.
Yes.
It's really interesting.
Another tradition is a table.
Again, this isn't every single table and every single tamina.
Mm-hmm.
But it's very rare for the tamina to just pick you out and just toast to you.
Mm-hmm.
Most, the tamina's will do this.
They'll toast, they'll say, please, I would like to toast to you.
Mm-hmm.
But mostly I want to toast to your mother.
Mm-hmm.
I've known her.
And they're always triangulating.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's always triangulating.
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
They don't let it rest on one person.
And it's very uncomfortable when they do that.
Now, what they'll do is they'll triangulate.
Mm-hmm.
And they'll give a toast to families, and then someone else at the table will then toast to you.
Yeah.
And he or she will aim it at you.
But the tamina didn't do that.
Yes.
The tamina's not meant to locate all the power in one place, or all the honor in one place.
They're always trying to, they call it like a Trinitarian triangle.
To me, it always makes sense.
So often we'll do, it's the third thing you're talking about.
Yeah.
So often you and I would drink from the horns, but we're not drinking to you or I, we're drinking to Vakhtang, the saint.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
There is a saint.
We're drinking.

**J.Heers:**
The horns represent honor because they were probably acquired through some- Battle.
You have to wrestle an animal or a battle or something.
And so you and I toast, you're the best, I'm the best, but this toast itself is for Vakhtang.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
I like that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think it's the way of, it is the only way to not fall into the pit we began our conversation, not into the pit of loneliness.
Because the moment you take the third out, like that's a tragedy, you will necessarily end up in the mayhem we are in.

**J.Heers:**
I feel like war is what you, at some point-

**P.Shchelin:**
I mean, not just, yeah, ultimately war.

**J.Heers:**
It is kind of you versus me in that moment.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Even if I love you, that's the tragedy.
That's what I mean.
Even if I say I love you and we have a great relationship, like let's say we are long term friends, et cetera.
But the moment it's just the two of us and no true other context, like no spirit between, no like high cert thing.
Well, we are, that's the tragedy, we are not the same.
We are different.
Do you notice it?

**J.Heers:**
Well, we don't have immediate, we don't have-

**P.Shchelin:**
And we don't have, so imagine, take this.
You are different from me.
I'm different from you.
you, there is no mediator between us.
Immediately.
Indeed, the only way for me to become more of me is to take some of you.
And for you to become more of you is to take some of me.
So then we inevitably end into this Marxist, et cetera, oppression reality.

**J.Heers:**
This is also the pattern of modern secular marriage.
Yes.
Inevitably, the man and the woman start to fight if the marriage isn't meant for the third thing.
And then they make an idol of their children.
The child is born as the mediator.
This is like destructive to the child.
It's so destructive.
I'm the mediator.
I'm the third.
And you're, no, no, I'm meant to follow you.
I'm not meant to lead you.
And so without God in the marriage, it's very risky.
I'm not saying people don't love each other.

**P.Shchelin:**
Come on.
He doesn't meant to be a scapegoat.
Yes.
But it's an alternative.
So thanks for bringing it up.
There's only other alternative for us not to kill.
Ourselves because they're liking us.
Let's kill somebody.

**J.Heers:**
It's going to happen.
It's what's going to happen.
