# ON FASTS AND FEASTS | John Heers and Pavel Shchelin

March 06, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPoaSv244mw) 01:02:12

**P.Shchelin:**
Okay.
Hello, dear audience.
Today, I have a special guest, which I would like to invite you to participate in our conversation with.
This guest is John Hears.
And John is one of the most welcoming persons I've ever met.
He is one of the best hosts in the most general general meaning of the world host, like both as a podcast holder, both as a Tamada, which we will talk about it later.
And he's my dear friend.
So welcome you.
I would like to welcome you on my channel.

**J.Heers:**
It is a joy.
We got a lot to talk about.

**P.Shchelin:**
Exactly.
And what I want to talk about today, generally speaking, is connected with the season.
So we are recording this podcast.
This conversation, this conversation several weeks before Lent.
And this year is a special year when Lent starts more or less the same for all denominations.
And that's why I think it's a really good occasion to talk about feast and fast and the interesting dance that happens between these two phenomenons as on all levels of reality.
But I want to start with more joyous thing like so as an expert of feast.
On feasting, John, how would you describe a feast?
What is an essence of a feast and why it matters nowadays?
How would you say it is?

**J.Heers:**
I start with my spiritual father in the Russian tradition of Rokor.
He was sitting with me.
This is when I was a young Orthodox Christian, a convert from Protestantism, Episcopalian in the United States.
He said he was with two other single guys.
And we're talking about my potential wife.
And I was I was very, the best way to describe it is I was serious about my faith to maybe to a fault.
I was zealous.
And I was very interested in if she could do it, be Orthodox.
And he said, but I want to ask you a question.
How does she feast?
And I was like confused.
But how does she feast?
What does it look like?
And I didn't know the answer.
I had never really talked about the importance of sacrifice as toward a proper communion and the the outcome being a beautiful family through the dedication to Christ.
And we could go on and on.
But I had never taken a sacrifice.
question seriously and um it was during this time period and then i left i didn't marry this woman and went to georgia the georgian republic where i got i got trained in in in hospitality and orthodoxy long story short i think the answer is that a a feast is the intimation of heaven and the intimate intimation of heaven is the ultimate it's how we know hope and so i don't understand people who don't naturally gravitate gravitate toward feast um as the ultimate moment of hope and so now there's drunkenness guilty um there's all kinds of guilty there's all kinds of problems with the feast but there's all kinds of problems with the fast and so i i i think it's just what happens when people hope is that they want to set a table they they want something to overflow and in orthodox theology i i i it's pasca right and um and it it's christ isn't contained in the grave so there's an overflow and the georgians taught me there should always be more on the table than you can eat and for an american ear trained in efficiency and pragmatism it doesn't make sense it's it's like there's too many remainders you know two plus two is four why do we have all these remainders and um i think the nature of the feast is to have excess because there's no reason we should have excess pavel i'm interested in you as a philosopher like what is the philosophical explanation of of more than we need have you ever thought about that it's a very hard question to

**P.Shchelin:**
answer it is like you know like god exists and he doesn't exist and he doesn't exist and he doesn't

**J.Heers:**
exist as more god exists as beyond and so in some ways the nature of our existence is the beyond we are meant to have more than we can imagine and the feast is an intimation of that

**P.Shchelin:**
well i never thought truth be told about this in a way like in a philosophical manner but your question brought several associations which i will share and we'll see where it goes first i think i think during the feast and in the religious and religious circles what we mean by the desire to have more and more it's a very good reminder that any movement per se like any movement generally speaking in physical reality or in a human social reality is the consequences of form of desire like and so you desire something you move towards what is desirable so in a way the desire creates movement and the insatiable you one can say so like it's never truly enough but it's almost never truly enough in our imagination it's like almost in illusions in simulacrums if you want to put it this way in virtual reality whenever face you with real reality suddenly you surprise you almost always have enough you have enough of human communication you have enough of human interaction you have enough of food you have enough of water etc etc so but ironically like if we're talking about a little bit adding theological aspect to it god is something which is never enough like you can definitely so it's something which is always keeps feeling the one who desires it so it's one i i don't remember which holy father said but effectively it's never ending movement like it's never ending the movement of desire i think it's kind of similar in dante's allegory like of heaven like that there is a constant movement around the sun or something like this so in a sense in an excess in a good feast like in a i will highlight in a good feast a feast which purpose is not to get drunk for the drunkenness sake but in the feast which is the purpose which is ordered to a higher purpose is to remind us that we still have a gigantic work to do in a heart expansion exercise to actually be capable of desiring more of a good things and being capable of keeping them and not to be too unloved so i think it's that's the point of the question i think it's a very simple question i think it's a very simple question because you know when you ask the question i think it's i think there is sort of connection here like because we're so trained in ironically like we're trained both neither in excess nor in moderation i would put it this way we're really trained in this very awkward flat line gray zone if you want to put it and any breakage of this great zone is equally challenged which we've been to Art of Tamada today, so Beck and Kyle.
And that's what I kind of thought struck me there, is that I think it's not a coincidence that in a culture of the new world, as you describe it, it's equally challenging for us to fast and to feast.
And there is some very interesting interaction happening here.
I don't know.

**J.Heers:**
You think philosophically it's played out in the role of the guest and the host.
So one of the drawbacks, I call them light people.
And so this is my sub stack and other places where I like to try to express our work.
Yeah, good.
The light people is a play, of course, on enlightenment, but also on this category called whiteness.
And we can get into that.
I'm not sure that that category is real.
I think it exists.
Mostly as a modern phenomenon.
But let's just, light people are folks who have been trained to imagine in a Cartesian way that the answers are all found in our discursive thoughts.
And there's something about the feasting that I've done and been blessed to be a part of, which is often Georgian, but not just Georgian.
Lived in Africa, West Africa, East Africa.
There's something about the intimation of eternity, when someone is sitting you down and giving you so much that you start to feel uncomfortable.
Now, a light person feels uncomfortable.
Let me try to explain this.
I want to play around with this for me.
A light person, let's call them the modern inheritor of the enlightenment, European enlightenment.
There's something about us that we're taught to be self-sufficient as an act of goodness.
It's like, because I am self-sufficient, I am also good.
Which, of course, is not a Christian narrative at all.
So when the host starts to act like God, and I find this in Islam too, when I live with Muslims, when the host starts to present like a God, in other words, it's more than you can imagine.
It feels like they're giving from, even from things they can't give from.
In other words, they're poor and yet they lavish.
You know what I'm saying?
A light person starts to feel very uncomfortable.
At least I do.
I'm one of those people.
I'm always trying to be less of one, but I'm not saying they're bad.
I'm not saying, but the enlightenment has problems.
So let me ask you a question.
And if any of these presuppositions are correct, when I start to feel bad, I'm not playing a proper role of the guest, which is the acceptance of the grace, which is exactly the same role between God and I.
If I imagine myself as self-sufficient, which is a bit of a Protestant theology, then I can imagine myself as sort of equal to the host, the host being God.
Now I have a, I'm a disordered guest.
I haven't come to receive.
I've come to add to my host.
I find all of this very interesting.
I think it's all tied up with feasting.
I don't always know how, probably we can work it out, but there's something about the role of the guest in our world, in the West, that is not allowed a proper feasting because we don't allow the host to be truly a host.
What do you think about that?

**P.Shchelin:**
I think you actually touched a very deep point, very deep illusion we are all share as guests and burn away all guests to the feast of life.
If you let me this metaphor, I think it's an illusion of control.
I think it's an illusion of self-control.
Like we want.
to believe and to act as if it's true that we are in control of our lives and the trick is we are but not in the way we think we are like you're in control you are in control of your life precisely no matter you can be a good guess that's upon you you're in control of your life and then like the way you order your heart like you can really like that's highly upon you like the way you exactly push your heart expand your heart move beyond this you know like it's even you know bastardized and you know pop psychology like get out of the comfort zone but in a way it is get out

**J.Heers:**
of your comfort zone yeah no right it's built on something true that concept yeah yeah yeah yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah exactly so and this true concept is like we have this illusion which we build this walls around ourselves this atomization because at least within this wall i believe i can control and i can control and i can control and i can control and i can control and i can control everything that happens and nothing bad can happen to me or if it's happening bad it's because i'm bad or something like it's the result of my lack of control and a true feast as you've been talking is a challenge exactly to this if you're coming as a like ideally if you're coming as a guest you don't know what you will be served like exactly like you maybe some most general understanding but you don't know exactly what you will serve like you don't know who exactly will be there like how long how long you don't know how long you don't know how long it's gonna take all these small details but you are not in control you are part of this thing but you are not in control of this thing and it is challenging legitimately like for us like it can be really really challenging so i i think it's connected with this idea of control and but then the life itself is not controlled you don't control whether you're sick this is it it really does

**J.Heers:**
it does speak of the integration of theology with with practical life which is what i really appreciate by a lot of these guys on the internet now who are managing to take you're one of them who are managing to take very difficult ideas that seem to be far away and really relate them to our everyday existence because this also will speak to how we meet our neighbor right in other words feasting and fasting is also about neighbor-to-neighbor relationships because i gotta talk to sky how long do i have to spend with him there's this attitude we always need to be able to talk to this guy how long do i have to get back to what i can control and what i can control is what i'm going to watch what i'm going to eat i think it's a major i would not even say a major problem what i would say is is at the core of what people in the west are now clamoring against but i don't think they would name it a lack of feasting and fasting or i don't think they'd name it an inappropriate guest host relationship i think they name it economics they would name it like yeah opportunity you know

**P.Shchelin:**
here i think absolutely i think it's first i really want to not defend west in that respect not not because i like but just the problem is not in the west or east etc i think the like proper way of understanding is modernity and yes west kind of created modernity but then it kind of spread around the whole world and it became common let's say if you wanted a common poison if you like if we are borrowing the basically c.s lewis's language he called it commonly poisoned like basically we bruise the poison but the poison became spread around everywhere so i think it's just more correct talk about it's in in this form because it's not the western problem like unfortunately like i wish it may be part of my wish i could say no i think you're right

**J.Heers:**
i think it's a better way to describe it as uh modern and pre-modern or or enlightenment and

**P.Shchelin:**
pre-enlightenment yeah kind yeah that's just more intellectually clear what we are talking about and this idea of exactly neighbor and atomization again in the pattern of feasting and fasting it's exactly the same pattern which breaks this idea of a modern man because modern man is not truly alone but he is neither truly social like if you consider the feast to being the pinnacle of communion like a true communion you know like the like exactly love jointly spread like love spreading around all the members of community and desires spreading all over the world you know like all around of the members of community and the way everybody cares about each other in the table like do you want this do you want that or a little bit more of this like stuff like this and faster than a proper let's say proper individualism if you want to be put it this way so it's a place when i limit myself when i introspect myself when i go into the depths of my heart then it's exactly two opposites of exactly the spectrum which modernity rejects both because you we kind of want we don't want to be truly in communion but we also don't want to be truly in ourselves like modern man finds loneliness truth be told unbearable that's why we need all the sound around us like we need to constantly some sound in our ears and some some visual stimulation some audio stimulation so like everything's a true fastest against but we need it because we are not truly like we are nice amongst no I don't know no no

**J.Heers:**
right right nor feet right what's the opposite of the monk I guess is the um yeah the socialized

**P.Shchelin:**
like I don't know just gesture like if you want to put it in a way like absolute like opposite yes yes some sort of this yes like yeah he was he's been writing about like neither Lord nor Hermit so you are neither Lord nor Hermit like and in our life that's the challenge of like feasting and fasting routines that you kind of need to move between both so that's some time of a Hermitism and then some time of a Lordship and then it's kind of flow continuity but it is challenging and just that's what I

**J.Heers:**
find very interesting like well I used to think um so I'm interested in your take I know you're you're often speaking about orthodoxy how would you how would you categorize orthodoxy uh obviously it's it's a religion it's a world view it's a it's a it's an epistemology it's a way of knowing so let's just say when I adopted that orthodoxy as a as a hope as a type of glasses through which to see just Kantian but let's just leave it like that for a minute yes okay um I've been I I started I've been wanting the the whole i've been wanting the jester and i've been wanting the communion because as a as a modern person before orthodoxy i got all the characteristics of an individual i i was rewarded by being a good individual in the way that the west rewards individuals and i've been trying to shed but it's it's it's a little bit discon it's a little bit disingenuous um because i'm creating false dichotomies as i go okay and the true the true orthodox person is integrating the two oh yeah they're not fighting one against the other and even when i do my podcast i catch myself and there's a reason i catch myself is because it's fun to juxtapose old and new it's fun to be a battler and it's fun to um it's interesting anyway to create really articulate opposites but i'm learning as i got older as an orthodox person my job is integration and and so in some way feast and fast is an integration right into what we've always meant to be so pavel the and i always say your name the way i say it but it's kind of it's kind

**P.Shchelin:**
of how people it's the way you love it don't worry so guess what though the prodigal

**J.Heers:**
does not return he returns to his father but he returns to a feast yes you have to

**P.Shchelin:**
remember that the father says go fat the lamb yeah yeah yeah the feast is created for his return absolutely yeah it's it's like because feast is an ultimate goal i would say all images of heaven are not about fasting like it or not it's about feasting like and all the symbolism is about feasting it's the fast is a preparation for the feast like the fast if anything it's precisely the period so you can appreciate the feast more like it's something which makes the feast stronger but i think it is very important again in the context of land because land is a complicated topic topic nowadays i think i will a little bit derail and then come back because i think it is related uh what we what we miss nowadays is uh that historically speaking land was always kind of organic process like it wasn't you know of special rules like very complicated rules to follow or like very you know this neat picking of like can i actually eat this or can i actually eat this or like does this count or does it's not like it was more or less organic again like the exact set of rules we most commonly tend to use nowadays were actually created in a very particular historical context in a very particular communities actually mediterranean communities and mostly for monks and um it's kind of became easy especially in other regions to then forget what is the purpose and especially since we moved into the age of abundance because historically like let's say not eating meat was not that much of a challenge for people because simply you eat meat only when you celebrate there was not simply even an idea of like you just eat meat every day like so it was so the rules were reflecting the bigger point and nowadays i think it's really important to rediscover the point i think if you want to put it this way not really hidden it's not hidden it's in the open but something we kind of tend to often overlook behind the rules like the point of all of us is to prepare yourself for the feast and that's just i think is a big area of a conversation of talking about it or explaining about it like not explaining just talking about it effectively to start because then it makes sense why like that what is the land is what's the purpose of a land is the purpose of land is not to have a dietary restriction like that's just modern day and age because of we are so far away from this organic world which whatever the rules were created it looks very artificial and like often in like you know families when one member is orthodox and another is not orthodox it's actually well and challenging to explain why this is included and this is not included like it doesn't make it doesn't make any sense are you vegan or you're not vegan you know this type like what what are these rules for

**J.Heers:**
what do you think of the move though many modern churches um the orthodox still try to go by whatever the rules have been and the catholics say okay pick something pick something and don't eat it on friday or pick something and don't eat it don't eat chocolate there's there's a mechanism for individual choice or something and is that an attempt to wrestle with modernity and i definitely think it's an attempt to wrestle with

**P.Shchelin:**
us in modernity and i will be open i don't have a universal great answer for it i think what is ultimately important and i think the almost answer will be parish by parish base truth be told like or something like this like because like ideally it should be based on a personal relations almost between to an extent priest and like you know as a parish member like there should be that general guideline and we definitely have a general guideline but the emphasis is definitely and i think i'm witnessing it more the definitely emphasis is becoming more on a spirit like like we need to make the let's say the technical rules more order towards the spirit of the spirit of a fast and that's where i think feast is coming from because that's where i think uh almost the challenge for fasting is nowadays is that we are not feasting again i i promise that i think this dual relationship is the key because unless you have this big abundant excessive um moving beyond all of the ordinary borders feast at the end of a fasting period it almost doesn't make sense to fast like ironically speaking like

**J.Heers:**
you're speaking i love this thought let's let's let's play that out for a second i want to get a little let's let's let's i'll share something um uh as the tamada uh so the tamada is a georgian let's we gotta stay on this topic because i go all over but i want to stay on this because i'm going to bring it right to it right now but the tamada is a georgian toastmaster and i've been adopted by georgians and i've adopted everything that they do um in in terms of throwing this party called the supra and we do it at a restaurant as you know and you've been it was wonderful time it was so it was good so good to feast with you so but here's what's happened is i've i've been hosting a lot of people at the restaurant not not not even not tens and tens but hundreds and hundreds common come in and want to feast in this georgian tradition it's very unique and i met a lot of young people and something's happening it's very interesting um there's like a neutrality of sexual desire so you didn't think i was going to go there but i want to go there there seems to be even among secular people that i talk to they'll come in with their boyfriend there's something like a friendship that is pre-dating the wrong word but predating the sexuality of their attraction in other words they're friends in a neutral way and not thinking about sex and so why i bring this up because you said you really need to know how to fast in order to to feast in order to fast and you made me think that there is a weird thing happening in society right now where it's like let's ignore the edges let's ignore the fat and the feast and let's get right down to this royal path and it's like these these couples are ignoring the beauty of the feast which is the sex of a married couple right um and they're trying to go right to this middle place of friendship as if it was a moral like a moral good and therefore then they don't also fast then they don't have to fight the desire to not be with each other for instance i don't want to sit on a couch with a woman and date them for year after year because the joy in some ways is the feast which is the sexual relation you see what i'm saying and this which would imply then that i get to be around her but as a faster and so as anyone who's fasting knows you don't sit around and fry up chicken and sit there and make all the most delicious meal and then don't eat it that's very weird and so i want to throw this to you it's torturous it's torturous but what i've noticed is i wouldn't call them ascetics see this is what's so weird this is what i'm trying to say i'll say it doing these tables have introduced me to non-ascetic ascetics people who practice asceticism without it being ascetic in other words there is no fat feast that they're trying to avoid and i think it's very unhealthy i think it's much healthier if we lived with more passion and more with more feasting passion for the for the desire for the thing

**P.Shchelin:**
and more fasting i don't know no it makes a little sense and and that's actually well let's go deeper but i think it's exactly the same pattern of life and death because any life is a product of movement the only place when there is no movement is the movement of death and this proper asceticism is aimed ultimately towards life one way or another as an abundant feast literally or an abundant feast when let's say monks start seeing energies it's like it's better than a fist it's not like it's not abstract it's more like sensual according to what we know it's more sensual even in the indescribably intense and even good a good feast is so it's this but more and more purified etc but it's this like or we can say that feast is this but you know you know it's more down to earth form uh so that's a proper monasticism but the quasi-monasticism you are talking about and i definitely see it a lot like let's be honest with myself or like people around me like it's this exactly the desire of neither so it's the desire of the stability the lack of movement because it becomes an interesting part because in any proper host and guest relationship so in any movement there is always a hidden danger it's always a double-edged sword yes so so a certain bravery is required to be a life if you want to put it this way a certain bravery is required to be with a woman a certain bravery is required to be a guest and i guess and that means we're just very covered people like modern man is a very covered thing this is you put the

**J.Heers:**
words to what i was trying to say which is there's these beautiful people by the way people are beautiful they have simply avoided the possibility of the sword of the danger you're absolutely right and somehow i want to pat him on the back as a father of daughters but i don't think it's a good thing because it it leads the man into a place of there's some sort of weakness in not being able to admit the danger of your manhood to your girl um i i desire the feast and so i can't lay on your couch all night like i really like that's very also very old world very and very georgian and i think russian if you go back in time any traditional like serbian but german

**P.Shchelin:**
french doesn't like any traditional culture any tradition where the man is meant to be in the

**J.Heers:**
presence of a woman and burn in ways that only he knows because he's so strong but he he would admit to a burning he would admit to a fire and a fight within himself if asked especially by other men but by the woman he would simply either yeah remove himself or he would move toward marriage

**P.Shchelin:**
and of course or other things yeah but but that's the thing yeah it's exactly still the pattern like at least the recognition of a desire and taking responsibility for this desire one way or another which also requires bravery and again we're coming to this point of kind of false comfort again sorry really sound both the way i wanted but it kind of is a false comfort because it's kind of like even in like 20th century russian songs like couple very popular one uh basically there is this line like if you if you are not living you don't have to die something along this line so in in a way like you can say that this cowardness is also related to this fear of death because both feast if you say that feast is this image of life in its fullest like an image not life in its fullest but it's an image of life in its fullest and fast is an image of willing full spiritual death to come back to life let's say to go like into the desert and to go into the grave to an extent and then to come back to life then this quasi-asceticism isn't either it's neither life nor death it's this kind of in-between it's constant limbo like if you want to put it this way it's a limbo like and uh limbo became such a norm for just as you can call it even a spirit of time the spirit of time is a limbo

**J.Heers:**
then that's good that's very true it's a spiritual limbo i do think i do think we're in a but i do think we're in an age of i do think there's desire there's greed um but spiritually i do think it is it's an empty time but it's being filled up it's it's being filled up by the you know the powers and the principalities of post-modernism but also by christian there's a christian narrative that's returning i think all over the the modern world um what will it become it's a really good question you made me had a thought can i share it with you about about i think into this a lot um this philosophy of the table and of feasting and i love it i think i want to really write a book about this but i want to say this to you what i noticed about the georgian supra which by the way can happen three or four times in a week so i just want you to know that like uh we know families in georgia that they're not trying they're not like on friday big party it builds on itself so the mother and the auntie will cook and then the guests will come over and then another person and it just sort of happens um but it happens and this is what i wanted to share it happens with order and i think a proper feast has elements of the fast yes and and so much like monasticism you would never say it's always a fast if you go to a monastery there's great even in even in a funeral you feel bright sadness there's there's always a hint of joy in in a monastery and at a proper feast at least i would argue the georgian students have done as well as anyone in history doing a proper feast you wouldn't see it at a round table if they can avoid it there might be a round table but the round table implies some sort of equality and democracy instead you're going to see a long table with a head the head is usually a toast master who calls everything to attention you you wouldn't be very odd to have a tamada that doesn't call the table to attention the odd table and at the other end of the table is usually the oldest male which is a sign of it's like a bookend sign of you know god the father god the son bishop and there's all this order and there's order in the toasting but there's a major consumption of wine which is the ultimate right in many ways for many people that's the ultimate expression of a feast but the georgian table you drink a lot but it's like not the point to drink a lot the point is to honor a lot or to be in a constant state of of of honor and and

**P.Shchelin:**
offering honor and what are offering and vulnerability just just being my memory that's i think very connected sort of gone but maybe you can connect the vulnerability and honor as a payer like we rarely do that about this way let me do that because it's really it's really true

**J.Heers:**
um someone a dishonorable person let's just say a dishonorable person approaches you and in that approach you sense something like dishonor the last move at that point is for you to be vulnerable you'll immediately begin to meet his his perceived dishonor with some sort of guard or attack and so at a supra when it's most beautiful is when the tamara is most honorable because he provides a he provides a safe place for the vulnerability of his guests and they know that when they act in a vulnerable way through a toast about their mother or something that was sad to them the tamada will protect them with his honor and you see tables that go sideways you see fat feasts that go sideways are when the table demands that the tamada not enter as an authority figure but rather sits on the side and then you see a lot of dishonor and but you also see a less vulnerability

**P.Shchelin:**
um it's i think it's it's really interesting like that it came up because again not scripted the whole conversation is not scripted just yeah just by the way sorry to tell your guests sorry

**J.Heers:**
it's not scripted because because now it's totally fine i think that's what the beauty of

**P.Shchelin:**
this conversation conversation is because this it connects to what we talked before like we don't want to be vulnerable and it's understandable to be vulnerable to become open like to share any truths effectively makes you open and to share any truths you have to be open but to be open also means to be vulnerable so that's why we created the shields of lies like just generally relying about our feelings we're liking about ourselves relying about um like about everything like the modernity is basically an age where lie is a virtue like that's one way of describing it which in in my opinion is very sad and the proper feast as well as the proper fast ironically because of the point one of the point of a boss has to become true with yourself like to look deep in your heart through let's say through limitation and you can say then the feast is a way to look deep into your heart through excess and to become vulnerable is still through an excess because you're sitting with your friend and suddenly your friend is basically publicly sharing Dean'sivo.�� no matter how far you go I can just basically not understand or understand what they're talking.
his love towards you and uh it's a mixed feeling it is a mixed feeling for a prideful man like because on the one hand you don't know how to react like i don't know at least we as a modern people we don't know maybe it was different in the old world and maybe it was way more natural but i think to an extent it was even back then it's all we always like to pretend this false modesty is a form of self-protection but then suddenly this vulnerability shows up yes and that's a moment of truth so because in truth you are vulnerable like and i think that's what

**J.Heers:**
you've been talking about a lot i i love this idea this question because i don't know and you don't know either because we live today and there has been a shift in the way that human beings see themselves our anthropology about ourselves the story is different i'm an animal with a rational mind whatever i am so fascinated with that question is um because in georgia i still see it i'm going next week and i'll see it again um you'll see someone gush i don't know you know that word gush to their their words are um almost effeminate with praise and it's very weird because i feel just as you described like stop enough it seems though the men that i like the most in georgia isn't all people by any means but the men i like the most they seem to exhibit something old which is like yeah i know what you're doing you have to do it and i'm not going to dishonor it by acting like you should stop because it's not about me it's about you doing the right thing isn't that

**P.Shchelin:**
weird it's totally it makes sense but it is weird for us that's why i would put it this way it's

**J.Heers:**
it's odd it goes back to that idea right of being a proper guest which is i'm going to allow your words to flow over me because i know what you're doing you're offering you're offering the meal you're offering the feast to me and so i'm not going to i'm not going

**P.Shchelin:**
to reject your feast and maybe also but that's the thing and maybe i will accept it in a sense maybe this actually reveals me more about me than i thought i am or like something i thought i want

**J.Heers:**
to be wow this is the best idea right which is it's not false see i think at least i was trained to hear that as as it's it's it's excessive and dangerous in that it it could engender pride somehow that i think that's true i do think that's a spiritual danger it's it's about it's about the construct of the table it's like you're meant to do it now it's like you're invited now the rules are such where the feast is inviting you to do it now and you should and i think we need times like that in life as human beings where we praise people that way i do that i do that i do that i do that i do that i do that i do that i do

**P.Shchelin:**
absolutely like because it's exactly this point you you brought it up like there is a time and place for it like that's the thing it's the time and place to reveal the truth and like if you're revealing this truth and even if a person is generally bad but he's not completely bad if somebody genuinely gives him this honor then he did something good in his life and it's not the cause of pride if anything i think to an extent to a truly prideful person uh like even boasting person person to be in a proper order fit to be stuck with you just hydrated enough that you Naturals feast is still challenging because guess what it won't be just about him like you will see people praising other people and when you think it like ironically it will actually bring him down but

**J.Heers:**
in an honorable way like also you see that too at our events where you where you've joined right you you have to sit around and hear all the other praises and it can be difficult i know what you mean especially for a proud person no doubt no doubt yeah you know when i struggle you know when i struggle yeah uh for people who don't know anything about this um we run a restaurant so we we invite people to these dinners um and the dinners have this they're super they're georgian but sometimes i sit at the table not as the tamada do you know i struggle

**P.Shchelin:**
i believe no like you want to do it the right way like i don't know you should have done this you know you should have done that but you really like forcing yourself it's it's his it's his

**J.Heers:**
it's not mine it's his yeah that's right that's right it's pride it's fascinating yeah i love this talk because i really do think in in the end the royal path has to include both and the royal path is peace as the georgians say it's shvidova it's a piece of soul and when you have it you begin to give gratitude and thanks to everything and i just feel like we've lost track

**P.Shchelin:**
a little bit it's okay we definitely i actually think that's one important element to it which the word you mentioned i just want to stress it the gratitude i think again both in fast and feasting you have the gratitude element the fast is more like internal gratitude if you want to put the silent gratitude and feast is let's say external that's right gratitude open gratitude but still gratitude because we live in an age where we give thanks all the time it's part of the common politeness but and again i'm not talking about other people i will just take myself it's hard to be grateful it's not easy to be grateful to me like because you rationalize it you think well i did this i did that like or like or it happens through my own merit or you know stuff like this most of the thing goes through but true gratitude also is a moment of vulnerability because i'm admitting that i myself is not enough like i am me only through like this people around me or people in my past or maybe people in my future and ultimately through god but still you again putting yourself in through gratitude you're putting your place in a in a way of hierarchical manner and during the proper feast the gratitude is precisely flowing it is the flow of gratitude all around and this gratitude opens up and reveals and makes the truth and challenges it but that's why it's possible that's why it's not boasting it's not even like what's the word for it it's not like hypocritical you're not lying to a person or you're like you're sharing the gratitude and you're being honest so that's a proper way of doing it

**J.Heers:**
i guess that's what i just that's right well gratitude in the end i think i've had this thought and i want to give it to you um and and tell me what you think i think part of the problem is in history we've never really seen a nation and i'm not saying that we see one nation we've never really seen a nation we've never really seen a nation we've never really seen now maybe some in europe that are thoroughly atheistic because i've had conversations with atheists about to whom to what how does an atheist a true atheist there's very few true atheists in the world but there's some maybe how do they give gratitude and to whom the question i guess i'm asking you is do you think as a philosophical exercise do you think you can be grateful if you don't believe there is ultimately a creator

**P.Shchelin:**
to an extent but ultimately it's very challenging i think it is very challenging to put at least like ultimately not but uh i think it's really hard for people to truly believe that there is no creator deep like i me personally think most we kind of again tend to lie to ourselves like because i think ultimately if you sincerely believe into this you know full-on bulletproof materialism you should and uh uh your life is like like nature or like commute and not it's a good way but at least these guys

**J.Heers:**
were honest i would put it okay there you go they were honest exactly yeah so they were honest like

**P.Shchelin:**
and uh i just think we are having big lack of honesty when it comes to these matters and uh but to an extent we have the lack of honesty is legitimately hard for us to be grateful like uh for for anything like truly because uh yeah i think that's an interesting point like when you're in a proper feast often uh yeah i think that's an interesting point like when you're in a proper feast often you're in a proper feast often you're not really grateful for anything like being with your friend your spouse your i don't know son or daughter you have a lot of things in your past between two of you like really a lot of things and none not all i bet none of not all of them are pleasant things and when this thing this person gives you gratitude it kind of almost invites you to simultaneously humility and forgiveness so you're simultaneously giving them for all of the bad things which happen between you because you're embracing their gratitude like or expressing their honor but also ironically being this uh guest uh you are in a position of power ironically because whether you reject or accept this honor so it's always delicate interplay happening and uh i would say organically it's supposed to be some internal part of us like the the the very fact that we sit like already for an hour and rationalize this thing and talk about this thing says a lot about us that we kind of don't feel it intuitively like we don't live in an age where like we need to name these things like to even understand why and what is happening while like it's not how we were like even 200 years single like

**J.Heers:**
you may have made the most important point for me well i love talking to you um and i think you just raised one which is um it's so important that we have this conversation the problem is is that we have to have it it's very odd um and it it speaks to the meekness that christ talks about you know the meek inherit the earth because they're already closer to god without this conversation there's so much speaking going on right where it's like you know they've already inherited the simplicity of god they don't have to go down this road i used to think those people were boring in fact if you go to west africa with me meek people are everywhere and i don't know if you've traveled but not to africa it's india's similar when i haven't been there but people tell me you know this is the guy who when you get off your bus he runs up and takes your bags and takes it and carries i had it's constant and you go this guy's looking for money but no he's just moving your bag because you're the foreigner and then you you see it all the time it's i always i i i i'm the image i have is of a hunched person um a simple person who's always helping and those people you find all the time at least when you travel in real old world places um georgia's the same and like what i'm saying is is they're not really debating about feast and fasts they kind of go to the wedding they know how the wedding's supposed to be they go home and they say their prayers they know how the prayers are supposed and we put everything up in our heads which is fine it's very interesting it's a little like porn it's exciting to talk about it and think about it and move it around and but it can get pretty pretty awful it can get

**P.Shchelin:**
pretty awful and it's always a question whenever you make a public talk and i know you you make public talks yourself so you're familiar with the danger of this boat like i still think we not like have to like there is still good fruit in this type of conversation again again nowadays but i definitely like acknowledge and admit that this conversation itself is the sign of illness and not the sign of health ideally like this type of truth or processes we are talking about kind of should be self-evident it's very ironic to talk about with american about self-evident because you know you hold these truths to be self-evident and stuff like this but well yeah i know and many many capital t truth actually which are supposed to be self-evident are not self-evident at least not for us and to an extent is a humility to admit it and to try to rediscover it and that's what i think like moving to the final part of a conversation i think it's just a sign of our age like and i think it's in a way a very unique challenge again not to you know to tinkle the pride of us but just admitting what the reality uh we live in a very unique age where nothing we can take we can rely on nothing for granted i will explain what i mean for most part of history uh people were naturally organically part of a tradition they didn't have to make a choice i'm born here it's the way it is like that's the way the faces i go to church every sunday or something or like like i like that's i a god's son's a child i have a child a man goes to war man goes to war and man dies in the wars and i became a widow or whatever but all these things were natural organic like even if i don't really want to do it i don't have to think whether i want to do it i just do it because otherwise yeah sometimes brutal otherwise i will be ostracized and kicked out of the village and i don't want to die in a forest like that's the motivator it's pretty huge motivator for people historically speaking well we live in a wage where every choice becomes conscious well you need to choose your face you can't just rely on your parents face you need to choose your spouse you can't rely on your parents or clan to pick up a spouse for you you need to choose like especially huge choice for women nowadays you need to choose whether you will be your mother you won't be a mother again it's not like our ancestors was that much virtuous than us i love them dearly but facing the challenges and choices we have nowadays i like again and i speak because i have the case of russian revolution you know russian we've been really proud of being the orthodox country for millennia but then what revolution came and 80 percent just like okay well but it was part of the thing and it never came into a heart like effectively like it was part of culture but it never came into a heart we had a lot of people to whom it came to her heart and like last week we had the feast of martyrs like new martyrs of

**J.Heers:**
russia like oh yeah that's right that's right yeah my daughter is named after one of the new martyrs yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
idea is like so it was the moment of revelation and if i have to look into you know not constructive but providential importance of our time generally speaking is the end of modernity is it is a moment of revelation like everybody everywhere in almost every country to an extent that is touched by modernity has to choose again you have to choose again like what you believe in it where you stand and to our conversation you need to choose to feast you need to have an audience that decides you you don't have to you don't have to you don't have to like there is no societal pressure on you like there is nothing pushing you towards it but you need but if you choose it it's upon you and that's why to an extent and i know maybe you have a different opinion that's why i think from a weird point these fists you are throwing in america are to an extent more valuable and deeper than the fists which are thrown in europe precisely because of this because people who come to this feast and people who now throwing the feasts in america everyone knows you might put this on the浴 stuff like around the country or to an extent even in modern russia i know it's exactly the same because it's still it's a willing choice to reject the atomization it's a willing choice to do something which is uncomfortable it's a willing choice to do the thing which you think is right even you don't truly understand why it's right and that values a lot i i think there is something

**J.Heers:**
well it goes to the greek to remember to put back together again which is really the the role of every human being it's it's not like i reject and i know you do too i reject the idea that the enlightenment was a special kind of human fall that that leads us now to eternal perdition yada yada uh i do think it's a it's a special kind of worldview that's pretty rare in human history you don't see a lot of that happening in the enlightenment and individualism you know cartesian anthropology and all that you don't see you don't see that but i will say this um there's something going on right now that our little group of folks who borrow this georgian tradition it's not georgian what i mean by that is is it is exceptionally as you said it is an exceptional foray into being healthy it's just a human act of trying to be hospital hospitable and we're just using the georgian form um in part because of circumstances of our lives yeah because it's

**P.Shchelin:**
part because it's good like it's a very good form like and it's exactly the structural element of tradition but that's always the danger with tradition and that's why uh that's why in a way i guess what i want to say i do understand why we ended up with modernity because we took tradition well it sounds a little bit big but correct me if like you think i'm going too far but effectively there is an always inherent danger in tradition to become for his sake if you want to put it this way just naturally happens because and again it's not just a tradition is bad but it's like by through creating order there is always inherent danger to just

**J.Heers:**
absolutely

**P.Shchelin:**
without substance like it's just nature we cannot live without the form but there is always danger in the form to replace the substance and then stuff like enlightenment or modernity effectively comes as a punishment like in a way providentially it comes as a flood as a punishment that's interesting yeah you value your own form let's see how truly you value your own form when you forgot it what is the substance is when i present you with a true temptation well we see the outcome and what you see now it's exactly trying to take a good form and what you see now it's exactly trying to take a good form but to take it's precisely as a form and putting the substance in a focus which is if you want to say i think it's exactly the point of

**J.Heers:**
let's say history we are in like you know we tested it um by we started to get nervous because people really liked the restaurant and we were doing very well and we all felt the thomadas there who are americans that we felt perhaps we had pulled it too far afield you know on the other hand the left they would call this we or um cultural appropriation or something like that so i never felt that but i began to wonder and so we went back and we found uh georgian um she's a historian of the supra and we interviewed her you can see it on my podcast and what she did essentially without being too melodramatic is she just checked each box we feared with don't worry you will be led by god and if you're honest then you will have a proper supra and you will not mock our georgian traditions but other than that i have no no advice and she just she made us aware that you have a blessing it was like a bishop's blessing she's done many papers on it and and studied georgian tradition and so for us it was enough and just to say go forward with a good and honest and heart and you're not really appropriating anything you're you're remembering that which is always existed you know yeah well i think this word remember might be the

**P.Shchelin:**
key remember is definitely it's i think it's better than choose again so i think the meaning behind is kind of the same so remember or choose again but point being and that's the spirit of which we are living in and uh it's both for difficult things in one form and difficult things in another form like everything is effectively becoming difficult when you're trying to remember things which like again as a matter of it's pretty simple imagine you your leg fell asleep but it fell asleep for let's say 30 years it would be really hard to start working on it again like it would be really hard to start working on it again but that's effectively what we are trying to do with our like spiritual health and spiritual soul and the extent is different depending on the context but the general pattern is the same and that's what i think can i

**J.Heers:**
maybe take it we don't have to end but i have a type of ending can i toast you perfect but it's gonna it's gonna be in that flattering kind of way so i wanna say for people listening this this might be something like one of the toasts um uh there was a moment in my life where we took a chance to have a party and make that party into something like a supra georgian supra and then invite people from around the country to come In many different ways than just baton board and кол presumably have a party pay to be a part of it so that we could raise money and i was very afraid no one would care and then out of the blue came two russian ukrainian eastern people named andrew and pavel pavel and um you came see you have to sit for the flattery now you came in the night in a way that i you were unannounced i knew something was happening but i didn't know what because the moment you took to your first toast i said someone has invited a tamada and from that moment on we've been friends not because you were a good tamada but because you dared to embody this spirit to remember it and out of the blue show up with people you don't know and now because of that you and i and others have built many other rivulets of beauty and so i want to toast to the the moment that we call the unknown into which we must walk and with love and you did and so to you brother and the good news is i didn't have to be i was sailing from my heart so thank you brother well

**P.Shchelin:**
i will end it here just will mention like all links to your work will be in the description it's a foundation you run which is amazing it's a restaurant you run for those who live in the usa it is amazing definitely worth visiting and it's everything else you want me to put there i will put down there

**J.Heers:**
thank you brother and thank you i'm just it's a joy and we did it we you got to come on my show now here i am i'm thankful yeah guys check us out all around the world more people working for us so god bless more more will come little by little
