# VIOLENCE, THE LEVIATHAN, REVOLUTION: Gnostic Civilization, Ep.7 | Jordan Hall and Pavel Shchelin

March 05, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zq4cKAa77Qs) 41:34

**P.Shchelin:**
Welcome everyone.
We are at the end of this journey.
We are looking at a thing which comes, at least we think comes at the end.
We stopped before in a place where we discovered that to live in an agnostic world, we have to live as if we are immortal.
But there is a real tricky element to it, like accidents happen, like wars and crime and stuff.
And other people, generally speaking, there is this weird problem that other people actually are kind of cause of our death.
So how do we square this?
Well, there is an easy solution you might have heard.
Peace to strengths.
And that's the topic of the final episode.
So that's effectively the summary and the introduction.
And it might cause the most desire to burn me and the steak that usually comes when I express the paradox hidden behind what seems the most basic and human.
The most humanist and irrevocable claim of modernity is that peace is good and we all must strive for global peace.
And that global peace is something even desirable and that we can achieve it.
And in fact, there is no such thing as big enough sacrifice to achieve such a world peace.
Well, to me, it represents, at least on the level of political philosophy, an ultimate lie of Gnosticism, which unfortunately is very appealing to us.
Precisely because of all of the reasons we discussed before, like, ultimately, are you pro-war?
Like, that's the most easy natural response.
Or are you pro-death?
This kind of responses can come into play.
Which just says again that we live in a pretty deeply Gnostic civilization and pretty deeply Gnostic world.
So the short answer is no, but.
And this but is important.
The but lies in the following way.
The peace Gnostic offers is not peace.
Is a simulation.
Is a simulation of peace.
That's why it's not peace, it's peace through strengths.
Because true peace does not come through strengths.
It comes through love.
But we cannot do love because love requires trust.
And love is not exactly about reason and knowledge.
And to love somebody in a broken world, ooh, that's tough.
Like, because also people are pretty broken too.
Like, pretty much, how can you love anything which is not perfect?
How, even bigger, how anything not perfect can be loved?
Ooh.
But again, death is bad.
Death is a destruction.
Death and war and violence and murder.
In a Gnostic paradigm, they are enemy for a very particular reason.
Because this destroys the illusion.
And this destroys the illusion not on a schedule which is set up.
So it's uncontrollable destruction of illusion.
And this is a destruction of illusion which makes a very important thing to the people.
Kind of difficult, honestly.
That's the most difficult part to manage.
Because there is a famous saying in Russian that there are no atheists in trenches.
So the closed experience of life and death, willingly or unwillingly, moves a man close to the transcendent.
The border between visible and invisible, spiritual and bodily, really becomes sin in this moment.
Really.
Yes, there are still Gnostic ways of doing it, but honestly, really hard.
Even Drew Berserk is not Gnostic, just in case.
So it can go really down, but it won't even be that Gnostic.
It's a fantasy.
Apocalypse is now a movie.
Basically, this is an example of going deep down in a spiritual world.
But that's exactly way more closer to the honest pagan, which is also not what Gnostic wants of a man.
And often it can actually make you rethink your suffering and move you higher.
Well, uncontrollable.
Again, it's one thing if I move you to the death on my schedule, on my term.
But there is always this uncontrollable element, the one you pointed out before, and I hope you will talk again what is this uncontrollable element of the deepest point of darkness is.
So ideally, you would prevent it.
Ideally, you would need to do it.
You would take this variable from the equation altogether.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
I feel like I want to go all the way back to the beginning, which is to say a story.
A lie, but a story.
That the world was created, and the world is broken.
And what we're saying, and I agree completely, and this is experiential, that it's at the moments where you encounter reality, in spite of anything you may prefer, and almost always on the basis of something that is suffering, that produces suffering, or grief specifically.
The as if fabric cannot be pulled that far.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
And so you are outside the field of the as if fabric.
You sometimes will even look around confused, because you are suddenly simply in reality.
And you notice that you are, and something qualitatively has happened.
Feels weird.
Yes, something has changed.
You're suddenly in the world.
You're in reality.
And the image of the matrix, the move of the matrix, where everybody is ultimately perfectly not alive, but is always able to pretend that they are in a simulation of life.
I think that's what the image was descending upon them before the Gnostic syndicate got a hold of those two.
So the phrase that I've been using of trading life for mere survival, and as you say, trading life for mere simulated peace.
And I get it.
Nobody wants to have grief.
Nobody wants to experience the death of the people that they love.
And in fact, this goes all the way back to this notion of cleaning your room.
It is in fact the case that we should put real effort into keeping our children from dying.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
It is in fact the case that we have to.
If we don't, they will.
They will put themselves in hazard, and that will be the end of that.
And so that leveraging of the reality of capacity and responsibility to avoid highly undesirable events simply gets hypertrophied past its natural reality.
That grief has a natural role to play.
That's the weirdest and most untasteful thing.
That's the thing you bite into that and you don't like it.
You want to spit it out.
We want to avoid grief at all costs.

**P.Shchelin:**
Just to hit it.
Because there is a sleight of hand even here.
Not intentionally, and I know you don't mean it, but in the language there is a sleight of hand.
About grief.
There is a certain context which we need to understand while talking about suffering.
And it connects it both theologically and philosophically to two different realities.
One theological, the easiest way is Isaiah.
There is no peace for the wicked.
Not there is no peace, but that peace is conditional.
Not that there can be a world without suffering, but it is conditional.
You see where I'm heading?
As long as you live in the wages of sin is death.
Or you can say that the wages of action, all causality, all pure causality necessarily leads up to the death, like the terminal death of the universe, even if you want to go down just the most.
So if you just stay on this level, in this separated world, you should end up in death because it's just where your natural laws of causality is.
So the Gnostic selling point is that can we stay here?
Can we continue sinning?
Can we continue being wicked, but still have something which looks like peace?

**J.Hall:**
Yes.

**P.Shchelin:**
And suffering is an antidote against this.
Not against peace, not like you need suffering in heaven.
Otherwise, I know you don't mean it, but it might have sounded a little bit like...

**J.Hall:**
Actually, you might, by the way.
But the word suffering is a very complex word.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes, but I really want to show out what Gnostic sleight of hand is.
So ultimately it was be wicked and have peace.
And unfortunately, this doesn't work.

**J.Hall:**
Nice.
Be wicked and have peace.
By the way, if that's just a straightforward marketing slogan, you get a lot of buyers.
Pretty much everybody.
Almost everybody would say, okay, good deal, because I can't be...
Good deal?
Good deal.
Yeah, good deal.
Wait a minute.
Who's the moron here?
Yes.
Everybody who doesn't buy that deal is the sucker.
Oh, wait, no, that's not how it works.
Because everybody knows two things.
They seek peace and they can't not be wicked.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, they can, but...

**J.Hall:**
And Christ offers you peace, but he also offers you a cross.

**P.Shchelin:**
Conditional.
Ultimately, there's a gap of this conditionality.
And if you remember, again, the story of nativity, it is a conditional statement.
Glory to the God in the highest and peace on earth among people.

**J.Hall:**
Nice.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's not separated.
Right.

**J.Hall:**
It's not one and then also maybe two.
These two things are together.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's causally related.
Okay, not religious language.
Only if you ordain your causal ladder of attention to the most proper, to the highest, to the realities such which you embody in your whole spirit, then you can effectively overcome the necessity of entropy and through mystery, miracle, love, trust, basically from all of the...
I'm using this as a metaphor.
Maybe you will use it in a ritual.
But effectively, you make the quantum jump.
Yeah.
You're making the quantum jump of the causality.

**J.Hall:**
Well, right.
So the language is funny because it's a religious word, but we just have no other better word.
I will often use the Greek because it's less loaded, but it's faith.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
And so let me sort of just articulate what I mean by that.
Because one, we know that like all things in the Gnostic civilization, the most important things have been very defamed and perverted.
Faith is perhaps foremost amongst them.
If not very much in the top of the list.
So it has nothing to do with something like willing something very, very strongly.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
Imagining.
Not even willing.

**J.Hall:**
Well, I want to do both.
Okay.
It also has nothing to do with imagining something that is not really the case.
It has nothing to do with imagination or a little bit, but very little.
And very little to do with the will or more properly, it has to do with a fully integrated self.
Yes.
The whole point is that faith is the faculty of a fully integrated self in relationship with reality, capital R.
And so I oftentimes will use very banal examples.
And it's not, you can say, if I pick up this cup, I have faith that the water will not suddenly come splashing on my legs.
And that's a proper use of the term.
Yes.
That's perfectly reasonable use of the term.
We just extend that out all the way, right?
Capital F faith.
And this goes back to that notion of the Gnostic sleight of hand has to break your faith.
If your faith is established, if you are actually in continuity of contact with reality, then the glory to God and peace on earth will be a lived reality that you can perceive as being a thing.

**P.Shchelin:**
And self-evident, kind of.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, self-evident.
Exactly.
Or at least, yeah.
And how do you say?
Straightforward.
Straightforward.

**P.Shchelin:**
Straightforward.

**J.Hall:**
And when something happens and these things, this overwhelm, something happens that breaks your faith, which may just, you know, there's many different ways that can happen.
We shouldn't be narrow because the key thing is your faith is broken.
Then the Gnostic sleight of hand enters.
And the entire cascade and all the different characteristics we've talked about begin to emerge.
It may get you at trying to use rationality to produce a salve, a therapy for the suffering that you're experiencing.
That's one way.
It may produce agency.
No, go, go do, go solve.
You take over.
It doesn't matter.
The point is wherever it can get in, it gets in and then it begins to do its work and separates you.

**P.Shchelin:**
But it has an ultimate enemy.
Yeah.
And this ultimate enemy is death, kind of.

**J.Hall:**
Nice.
Yeah.
And we've seen actually this death happens, as you say, collectively, systemically.
The world that it builds, the civilization that it constructs, dies.
Individually, subjectively, the self that you've been given, the as-if identity that you've been presented, that you can wear as your power to armor, even as yourself, atrophies to near nothingness, also dies.
It may die locally.
Some event may occur.
That makes it no longer work.
Or it may die ultimately in the sense that you, in fact, corporally die.
Your life on earth ends, on this earth ends.
And it can't solve that problem.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, I know it can't, but I know it does a thing which to me sounds like madness.
But what it tries to do is to substitute eternal with endless.

**J.Hall:**
Yes.
Very nice.
I know this very cleanly.
I call it the Leibnizian error, actually.
The limit as X approaches infinity.
Infinity equals infinity.
And of course, these are completely wrong.
It's wrong category.
You're not even thinking about reality or infinity properly when you say that.
But yes, they try to substitute endless for eternity.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Which they even can't do.

**J.Hall:**
Can't do that either, but that's the offer.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes, that's the offer.

**J.Hall:**
It's funny.
They don't even offer you the right thing, and they can't deliver on their offer.

**P.Shchelin:**
But the tricky part is why it works generationally.
They can create a good enough image of this offer for a certain period of time, for a certain generation, for a certain moment.
So time really plays a tricky role.
Time, on the one hand, is their ultimate enemy, because that's another hidden desire of Gnosticism.
Stop time, which we didn't talk about.
And this whole eternal global peace they're talking about, it is the stop time clock.
Let's just stop it.
Cut all of the causality.
Because if you think about it on a pragmatic level, okay, we have states, nations, people, borders.
Entropy emerges.
It emerges for reasons.
So, like, life continues.
I don't know.
The population changes.
Or the amount of population changes.
And there is a spiritual sign behind changes in populations, like it or not.
There is.
But ultimately, the state now and the state in a hundred years will be a different state.
And any border, like the whole idea of border, is not stable.
Like, there is no stable border in history.
I'm sorry.
Any border is a dynamic thing.
Like, it's actually Americans understand it very well.
Any border is a frontier.
Yeah.
Like, but what the proposition of eternal peace is, is, let's say, to make every frontier a border.
Well, there is a hell price to pay.
One of the hell of the prices to pay.
You need to artificially suppress life.
And you need to artificially promote death.
Not death, but almost dead state.
Like, dying.
Like, it's injury.
Not death.
Actually, wow.
Sorry.
I didn't think about it.
But that just in the state politics.
So, you won't.
We won't want to let a state collapse.
Because that's death.
We don't want to let.
Notice that how in the last 400 years, the idea that the state can die.
That the state can be dissolved.
That the state can collapse.
Any state.
It's actually something we feel very scared upon.
Well, that's something new.
But something erupts under the whole global system of the United Nations.
Right.
If state is.
So, we need to kind of keep it dying.
Yes, we cannot make it alive.
For example, a particular state.
So, let's send it emergency relief funds.
Let's send this.
Let's by no means allow its border to be changed.
Even like now there is only 5 million people living on a territory which like 100 years ago there were 50 million.
They can't defend their borders.
They can't do anything.
Like, they cannot feed their own retired.
But now their borders are sacred.
Why?
Why would we do it?

**J.Hall:**
Hold on.
Let's slow down.
Because to get to that.
To get to the point of stopping time.
We get to a very particular place.
But let me back up a little bit.
The deal is this.
One.
Okay, fine.
We'll try to help you live a long time.
But two.
The self that we are going to give you.
That self is attached as part of its identity to something that definitely will last longer than you.
This is what you're saying.
This is the state.
Or whatever.
It could be the scientific institution.
It's a non-human object that has the capacity for us to pretend like it has life.
And now I can say.
And people say it.
It's sometimes called like the immortals.
Einstein is immortal.
They say that.
They say Caesar is immortal.
Not because he will in fact actually enter into eternity.
Or even that he will live a particular time.
But that his name will be known.
His name will cascade down history.
And in fact Caesar's name has cascaded down history.

**P.Shchelin:**
But Caesar was honest.
He honestly worshiped the goddess of glory.
And he sacrificed everything on her altar.
So that's the thing.
We are not even Caesars.
If Caesar came into modern world.
Oh my goodness.
Like imagine him looking on modern French politicians.
And our Italian politicians.
Like he would be the first honestly to basically do a coup.
And just trying to set up things in some kind of what he would perceive.

**J.Hall:**
But the point is that that's the version of the offer.
Like the best version of the offer is that you will attach yourself to something.
That is in fact actually larger than yourself.
Right?
There's a simulation of transcendence.
That has an endurance.
And life longer than you.
Which is why you feel it viscerally.
When you imagine your state.

**P.Shchelin:**
But as you said the key part is the simulation.
Because it's not like in a healthy way.
It is a continuation of you organically.
Like it is this.
There is a chain of organic connection between you and this bigger identity.
Like homeland if you want to put it this way.
Which gets a form.
The state of a Gnostic is a very particular thing.
It actually rejects the organic sense.
That's why it rejects the kink.
That's why it creates a simulation.
It's an eternal placeholder.
In a place of the kink and a kink.
Which ideally.
Like originally because that's actually Hobson coming into play.
He was very conscious about writing it.
He was.
Hobs.
He was desperate.
Let's throw the moment of time until Christ comes.
That was kind of his understanding.
Like we can solve this problem until the second coming.
Let's freeze time effectively until then.
And let Christ decide all of this.
Well let's just move a couple of steps forward.
Let's just take Christ out of the picture.
And let's just stop time.
Period.
Because that's the very idea of League of Nations.
Or United Nations.
It's an idea of stoppage time.
It's an idea that you can prevent all of the conflicts.
Simple act of deliberation and good faith.
Because there is no faith in the picture.
And there is a whole crook and moron thing.
Why do we want the morons to willingly submit.
And again it works to an extent.
But then.
The morons who have sometimes nuclear arsenals realizing that they are morons.
They don't like it.
For example Russian morons who got this sign of a deal in the 90s.
They really didn't like when they realized in 2000s that they are the morons.
Hence like what you see right now.
But this is a simple part of the story.
But it's happening all in all.
But on the deepest level you do need to make these two very counterintuitive things.
Because that's how it connects.
You do need to stop movement below.
And ideally you really really really need to slow down the movement above.
I mean the deaths and the births.
That's why kind of big shifts in populations.
Like generally birthing.
But becomes potentially very dangerous phenomenon.
And on the contrary like letting let's say rip the wages of sin.
Which in course of any collective would be.
If you made critical number of mistakes.
Or if you made a critical number of false belief or decisions.
Rip what you saw.
You encounter death.
And that's what war in history is in part.
It's like war is not just.
It is obviously evil, horrible, cruel way.
But ultimately it is like.
Well you have no more people willing to fight for you.
Who?
Like by whose mercy should you have what you have?
Do you see what I mean?
Like so.
You want.
And that's why it's a tempting offer.
Like again another tempting offer.
What if you can have all you have.
Without having to potentially and sometimes actually having to defend it.
That's a good offer.
Like you can keep your power of the plebs.
Without having to die for this plebs.
The deal to nobility.

**J.Hall:**
Very good deal.
What I noticed that I'm trying to get on.
Is I'm finding myself taking all of this.
And coming all the way back to the.
Not the beginning temporally.
But the beginning in sort of.
Why?
Why is this part of reality?
Where is this Gnostic sleight of hand?
Where is this Gnostic civilization?
Where is this notion?
What is its source and origin?
What is it?

**P.Shchelin:**
Well to me.
I think there are two ultimate presuppositions.
One.
I did express earlier.
But I maybe repeat it.
And it will sound differently.
I think it's some deep, deep, deep belief.
And that's why it's actually a very tragic story.
That not perfect cannot be loved.
Oh.

**J.Hall:**
A deep belief that the not perfect cannot be loved.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Why God would die for us.

**J.Hall:**
Wow.
Okay.
That's very intense.
Which is just to say something like.
You.
Individually.

**P.Shchelin:**
Me.
Personally.

**J.Hall:**
It is ultimately a rejection.
Of.
Salvation.
Yes.
On the basis of.
I cannot believe that I can be loved.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
And then everything else follows.

**J.Hall:**
Everything else follows.
Yeah.
It's funny.
Everything else follows.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
But there is a tricky part.
I will explain.
Like why it's belief.
Because this experience of this belief will necessarily kind of make or condition you to love other imperfect things.

**J.Hall:**
Okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
I actually love them.
And you kind of don't want to do it.

**J.Hall:**
Ah.
Yes.

**P.Shchelin:**
You see.
Because it's a dual sword.
If your imperfect self is loved wholeheartedly by the highest power.
You don't have excuse to not love.
And you know from your experience that you do not love.
Just to be clear.
I know from my.
I have been.
So.

**J.Hall:**
So this is.
So this is.
Let me say this back.
Proposition.
The story.
Is that the world is broken.
The truth.
Is that your heart is broken.
Yes.
That is what you were saying.
That's the truth.
The truth is.
Your heart is broken.
And you begin a process of responding to that.
By producing a false reality.
That places the error at the level of the world.
And everything follows.

**P.Shchelin:**
In collaboration.
I have to say.
In collaboration with knowledgeable agents of much higher knowledge than you.
So it's not just you playing in the story.
You are willing to play in the story to what you think saves the brokenness.
Okay.
Sounds evil.
But effectively you're making an idol out of your broken heart.
It's a final idol you make is your broken heart.
And you center everything.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
Okay.
So we can look at the very, very.
Like there's a micro version of this that happens.
Every time you encounter a reality that breaks your heart.
And you endeavor to resolve or solve the problem.
By virtue of in some kind of therapeutic response.
The therapeutic response could be alcohol.
The therapeutic response could be work.
The therapeutic response could be denial.
It doesn't matter.
The therapeutic response could be therapy.
It could be talking therapy.
But instead of actually suffering.
The suffer.
The meaning.
Meaningfulness of the experience.
And being in open heartedness and vulnerability to the reality.
You choose something other than that.
Okay.
Yes.
So that happens all the time.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
And this is.
On the next step you create.
Effectively you create an illusion.
The problem is.
For some reason.
And you don't really want to accept.
It's knocking on your door.
You don't want to think this way.
But you just can't help at certain level.
To observe it's falling apart.
You created a great wonderful illusion of cooperation.
Globalism.
And global trade.
It's falling apart.
Like.
Or something.
You created a perfect illusion within your local level.
Your family.
Or something.
You created.
It keeps falling apart.
And that's why peace through strength.
Your son and I will hold it together.

**J.Hall:**
Just like this.
Yeah.
So it's.
The cinema version of this.
Would you.
You would be showing a family.
And you should be showing a family where a son dies.
One of four.
And the father then goes through this process.
Right.
His heart is broken.
And he commits himself to protecting his family.
But at the cost of his family.
Entirely.
And of course eventually it falls apart.
And that is the tragedy.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because in fact the more you hold it.
The more entropy.
The more causes of entropy within it.
Right.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
You have not yet lost the love of your other sons.
And the day that your first son dies.
But 40 years hence.
They're all alienated.
They are themselves trapped in this world.
This civilization that you've been creating.

**P.Shchelin:**
Then.
Like.
In religious language.
Like.
The number of sin.
The amount of sin is increasing.
And with sin comes the wages of sin.
And that's the thing.
On every single iteration.
It's actually much harder to keep it.
That's why ideally you need to go through periodical catastrophe.
To just wipe it clean.
Yeah.
Like.
But the problem is it kind of starts speeding up.
And you still can't control.
Like you can't control.
Neat.

**J.Hall:**
So then.
So the way my mind also turns to this.
Is I can run it through a different way of thinking.
And say.
We have diagnosed.
What would be called in some languages.
A niche.
There is a.
A location where a series of particular characteristics align.
So as to produce a standing wave.
Or something that has stability or endurance.
For an adequate amount of time.
For it to produce itself.
And to reproduce itself.
And what we see is that in the arc of the human experience.
It does.
It has these systemic characteristics.
That it pushes itself out to capture.
And enroll other beings.
And other people.
In its own dynamics.
And the duration.
And the magnitude.
Of its fragility.
Is bound by.
Three.
Limits.
One limit.
Is that it will eventually.
There's a temporal.
It will ultimately.

**P.Shchelin:**
Time brings change.

**J.Hall:**
Time brings change.
There is the notion of fragility.
That it becomes more and more susceptible.
And then finally.
There is the notion.
Of the trade-off.
Of the fact that you will be.
You will be going from the comfortable.
To the uncomfortable.
That it degenerates naturally.
And so you have this.
In the hypertrophy cycle.
Okay.
The only response.
Is to hypertrophy.
So you increase.
The intensity.
And then.
It degenerates.
And you hypertrophy.
And until you reach.
The natural.
There's some natural limit.
Where you just cannot.
Double down.
Anymore.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well.
But it might not.
Happen on your life.
Like.
No.

**J.Hall:**
You.
This case.
Is whatever.
Whatever.

**P.Shchelin:**
Who.
Is trapped.

**J.Hall:**
In this system.
Yeah.
So this is.
I mean.
A big part of the story.
That I.
magnets.
It runs into limits.
Those limits.
Are.
Bound.
By its.
Identity.
Of.
It.
Of what it is.
It can't change.
It's identity.
So it can only double down.
It's identity.
At.
The core.
If it successfully.
Renews its ability to access.
Resources.
It goes.
but it gets a half-life on that you're on some kind of curve at some point the doubling down which requires more energy at some point the doubling down hits a limit and then the identity must go away which then looks like a collapse this is an objective assessment subjective example

**P.Shchelin:**
because it is a pretty accurate description of the box and the key gnostic sleight of hand is that you are in the box yeah because as long as you are in the box as long as you are in this gnostic civilization it's inevitable again the wages of sin is there so like it has to happen yeah what it doesn't say is what you hinted before so now the deepest level is actually a way of jumping out of the box so the only solution to the crisis is not within the crisis jumping out of it and to the point of the final topic it's a beautiful thought which i read in the batista's book but it's absolutely true from political science perspective the the the to do to war is not peace it's liturgy and that's the jumping of the box which gnostic civilization can't actually control right not at all not at all not at all agreed so what means liturgy in that context i guess yeah just saying it like as we said before i can choose let's say face ultimately so let's say easy example of basic memetic crisis you and me love the same woman for some like we're young guys strong like some are strong some are smart some is both maybe there is a certain response but we love it all together or we want it all together with the giraffe would say desire it all together we all starting showing our best qualities pursuing her the best we can that's important part maybe for you it's brain for me it's strengths maybe for somebody else it will be art for somebody it can be money whatever it is like it's just the best version of yourself like whatever best again of the most you can show she will choose one and the other is the same thing will have to face a choice.
And that's the tricky part Gnostic doesn't tell, truly.
That's enthronics.
It talks so much about will, but they actually cut down the freedom of will in the most important element.
I can choose whether I use real energy of entropy in hatred, which really emerges when my sacrifice is rejected.
But it's my choice whether I use it for, promote it into violence.
It's my choice.
But this choice is not based on reason.
This choice is based on faith.
This choice can be based on communion with some higher purpose or any faith in this higher purpose.
You can pretend, and the problem is like, you can pretend it's just an objective rational law.
Like, trust me, not good enough when it really hits you.
But logically you can, on a smaller level memetic crisis, you can pretend to rationally jump out of this way.
On a real memetic crisis, you won't.
It will take faith.
Yeah.
And that is more than a notice that this act of we can do it.
And this is, have you read, Steinbeck novel, To the East of Eden?
Like it's...

**J.Hall:**
Steinbeck, yes.
Yeah, yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
The key part of the story is the story of Cain and Abel, if you remember.
And he spends a lot of time talking about the most proper translation of what God tells Cain.
And after all different discussions, the story comes to that the proper translation would be, there is a sin lying in front of you, but you may overcome it.
So it's up to you.
Why?
The only way you can do it is through faith.
It cannot be done rationally, it cannot be done logically, it cannot be done knowledgeably, it cannot be done even through will.
Even willfully it truly cannot be done.
But it can be done through faith.
And that's what means the liturgy.
Liturgy is jumping out of the box.
Liturgy is overcoming the memetic crisis.
Liturgy is accepting that there is movement and there is entropy in any change, any movement, but you're choosing not to let the potentiality, the negative potentiality of this entropy shine through you, you're not letting it shine through.
And if there is a critical mass of people doing the same thing, then suddenly you're achieving some impossible states within the Gnostic paradigm.
But the reason only it's possible is because there is the dual relationship between the quantum and.
So it wouldn't be possible without the highest sacrifice.
That's why two commandments of Christ are in direct, again, causal relationship.
You cannot love your neighbor without loving Christ.
Physically, you can't.
People suck.
Like, for various reasons.
Like, have you met people?
Like, honestly, like, that's the soul of your joke.
If you don't believe in it, like, why would you do it?
But if you believe in it, well, there is a chance you will be able to do this.
And if you do this, then the whole, this quantitative limits and even theoretical limits, they just stop working.
It's like jumping from linear algebra into completely different space, topography of space.

**J.Hall:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Which we don't know how to operate in it, just to be clear.
That's the weird part.
We can kind of imagine hell in a way.
Imagining heaven, that's pretty tough, tough to do.

**J.Hall:**
Well, and of course, the point is that once you've accomplished an adequate degree of participation in liturgy, once you've adequately surrendered to living in and through faith, that's not really a question.
It's, in fact, becomes irrelevant.
Yeah, the image that I had once was like, first you thought you were falling, and then you discovered that you were actually flying.
You don't know how to fly, but flying, you know, flying is what is happening.
You know, it's the feeling, it's the feeling, right?
As you jump, it looks like falling.
You're not in control.
You're surrendering to something.
Initially, you think gravity, but then you begin to realize that there's no bottom to it.
And it's not falling.
It never was falling.
It just felt like falling when you thought you were a person who was walking along the ground.
When you thought that you were yourself was something that under its own will, rationally took responsibility, responsibility for controlling navigation through reality.
So when that went away, that thought it was falling.
But at a certain point, you recognize that was never reality, and it was never falling.
It was actually flying.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's the tricky part, because like what we've been kind of also hinting at, it's in this system of like topological element, there is what this jump is effectively, it's becoming more and more, so it's becoming more of you.
So like, that's the whole idea of humility and the whole idea of a name.
Like, again, also connects that like why it is maybe materially possible because effectively through humbling yourself to your own logos, to your own identity, you are not becoming less of you and limiting your will in a direct way.
Like the limit means making something less of, but the trick happens that you actually, by surrendering, by taking this, you are actually starting to becoming more of you.

**J.Hall:**
Right.
Oh, that's interesting.
Although here's the, it's not the trick.

**P.Shchelin:**
Not the trick, but paradox.
How would I say?
Paradox, let's do paradox for good things.

**J.Hall:**
But there is a trick, and the trick happens here, which is it doesn't seem like that's actually how it's going to happen.
And in fact, it feels like exactly the opposite is absolutely certain.
And I think it has to, right?

**P.Shchelin:**
Otherwise it becomes a deal.

**J.Hall:**
Otherwise it becomes a deal, exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
Like, hey, of course I'll surrender as long as I get to be more of my own self.
It's like, yeah, you do get to be more of your own self, but you're not going to believe that at all.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
Even if you know it.
Yes.
That's the tricky part.

**J.Hall:**
You'll experience this absolutely as death.
You'll experience this absolutely as sacrifice.
Everything in you, because of course it really, in some poor critical sense it is, because the self that you've carefully constructed, the as if self that you began to identify with, is in fact going to die.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, because again, I mean, generations, you, like you have a baggage, like let's be realistic.
And the problem is like, you have so much baggage that you started to treat baggage as you.
Like you kind of don't separate yourself from baggage.
So when your baggage is burning, it burning, you are burning like in this moment.
Right, right.

**J.Hall:**
Okay, so let's do the, let's do the checksum.
I'm beginning to suspect maybe why you chose to have this dialogue with me.
As I've mentioned, I don't know if I've mentioned it while I've been recording, but I've mentioned it at least a few times.
Up until relatively recently, I was in fact very actively involved in, in a profoundly Gnostic effort, in the sense that we're talking about it.
And here's what I mean.
I and others, I think correctly, saw that the end of the civilization in which we live is coming.
For many of the reasons we've described, we are reaching the fragile stage.
We are reaching the, we can believe in nothing stage.
We are reaching the perturbation of something like the stochastic barbarian stage.
We're reaching the limits.
We're reaching all of these different metrics that if you look at it in the objective, the objective is going to fail.
And we've definitely reached the impotent stage.
We're admired in the impotent stage.
There's no way we can solve the problem with who we are.
But the response that we came up with was initially, and for the most part, a response that comes from the Gnostic lineage.
And that is, well, we must constitute some new kind of as if, some new kind of will, some new kind of agency, yeah, that is, has, I mean, the language was actually quite specific, has a level of, of reason, a level of knowledge and power that is in fact adequate, larger than the size of the problems that we're facing, right?
So you say, hey, I have a problem size 10.
I've got a solution size eight.
It's not going to work.
Well, what I'll do is I'll make a problem size 12.
And how do we do that?
There's a variety of different ways you can do it.
And point in fact, there's a variety of different ways you can't do it.
AI can't solve the problem, oddly enough.
That's the effort that's going to be tried and it won't work.
And so I, and some others began to try to figure out what is a proper solution look like.
Now here's the problem.
This is where I entered into the portal.
You cannot become an honest pagan, but I did actually become an earnest pagan, an earnest effort to become an honest pagan.
And then what I mean is this, with an adequate amount of reason and an adequate amount of knowledge, one of the things that you can accomplish is to recognize that neither reason nor knowledge can do the thing that they claim to do.
You reach the limits of reason.
You reach the limits of knowledge.
You reach the limits of power.
You experience the limits of as if identity, right?
All of these things actually can be perceived.
If you actually look at them closely enough with enough intensity, which I did, this then leads into the leap of faith, which is to say the leap into the category of faith.
But from my experience, the leap of faith was initially a leap of faith.
It was like Socrates, let's say.
Meaning some spirit, I don't even know exactly what that means, but it's going to be something like that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Some demon.

**J.Hall:**
Some demon.
Yeah.
Some demon.
Some Elohim.
We can even say that.
We can be Jews about it.
We can be Hebrews.
Okay.
But it's interesting because if you're on the path of earnest pagan, then you're actually beginning to enter into the proper path.
It is not a good path.
It is not an easy path.
It is not a path that separates you even the least bit from suffering.
In fact, because you've now begun the process of leaving the Gnostic, we call it salve, not salvation, but salve, you're beginning to feel all of the things that were being held back by that salve in all the different ways, subjectively, spiritually, emotionally, relationally.
Your identity goes away completely.
And of course, you are in fact finding yourself in too many relationships with too many demons.
And you have to figure out how to deal with that.
But in my case, by the grace of God, I was brought ultimately to an adequate level of humility to actually receive that grace.
So I stand here as an experiential embodiment.
As an embodiment of the arc of the story that you have been telling.
And I can say, we do.
Oh, good.
We both do.

**P.Shchelin:**
We've been telling.

**J.Hall:**
Oh, we've been telling.
Yes, that I've been participating in.

**P.Shchelin:**
And I've been telling myself also.
Gnostic itself, like, not as visibly maybe as your story, but in spirit still.
I wasn't still.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, so I can speak to the hierarchs of the contemporary Gnostic revival.

**P.Shchelin:**
In a way.

**J.Hall:**
And I can say, hey guys, I can save you some trouble.
I will also be buying you a lot of trouble, but I'll save you a bigger trouble.
It's not going to work.
We know what the right answer is.
The right answer is right there.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's paradoxical.

**J.Hall:**
It's paradoxical.
It involves even embracing paradox as a part of reality.
Mystery is fine.
Don't worry about it.
It's okay.

**P.Shchelin:**
But the Gnostic paradox cannot work.

**J.Hall:**
Oh, the answer, but the thing.
Sorry, I can finish.
So then you can imagine yourself as a hierarch.
And the problem of this, the problem is quite salient.
If your powered armor is very limited, it's not that hard to get rid of.
But if your power armor is monstrous, your powered armor is powerful, then it's very difficult to exit it.
And here's the only thing that can be said.
You are in fact actually loved.
It is actually the case that your atrophied self is loved, is lovable, and is who you really are anyway.
So although it is terrifying to leave that powered armor, it's the only way to get to the place you want to go to.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because ultimately you'll look for us.
You look for love.
That's ultimate.
All this running in a circle is all searching for love, which is by definition not inside the circle, but.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
It's funny.
You can almost imagine that the other side of that conversation is a handful of people that one might imagine.
In some sense, you're even talking to the one fallen son.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, I think let's end here.
I'm grateful to you.
I'm grateful to the spirit.
I'm grateful to the spirit.
And I hope good things will come to it.
I hope good things will come to it.
But I love this journey.
It was a paradoxical and interesting story.
And had warnings, not warnings, heads up ahead, but confession.
I don't know how it happened.
Like if you ask me to repeat the story, I won't be able to.
So that's why I find the most interesting part.
So see you next time.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, it's a little intense.
That's good.
