# Universal Table Part I - The Hidden Medicine | John Heers

April 17, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzM5kq4uOCw) 32:52

Supra-natural Orthodox philosopher Pavel Schelin and the godfather of traditional Georgian feast in the US, tamada extraordinaire John Heers join around the good table to uncover
the secrets of "The Hidden Medicine".

**J.Heers:**
This feels like you're trying to get me to know something beyond my own thoughts.
Yeah.
What is that about, Pasha?

**P.Shchelin:**
You can play around the word.
It's a game.
You can say, it's just supernatural.

**J.Heers:**
Ha ha, that's right.
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, hello, John.

**J.Heers:**
Well, hello, Pasha.

**P.Shchelin:**
We've been planning this for like several months, just to sit around the table and talk.
We're kind of coming from two different streams to this table, but hopefully something beautiful will come out of it.
One part of my interest is pretty straightforward.
I call you my friend, and I noticed that you honestly have a legitimate problem of telling people what you're doing.
What exactly it is you're doing, unlike, and since we happen to be in America, where what do you do is a central question of anyone's.
Identity, I thought, maybe let's tackle it.
And like we had some other conversations before on your channel, on my channel, like we're kind of a little bit danced around the bush, but let's face it straight away.
And then the second stream is just my personal story.
The title of this series is Universal Table because the experience of Supra, spoiler, the table played a huge role in my life in the way I even.
See philosophy in the way I philosophize.
So I want to share it and maybe connect with what you do.
It is truly universal in a sense.
It's simultaneously looks quite simple, just two guys sitting around the table or more people.
But I would also claim it's pretty huge, as huge as the world is.

**J.Heers:**
I think so.

**P.Shchelin:**
I know you think so.
We have a tricky question to show us to show.
So so let's start at the beginning.
I won't ask.
What do you do?
But I would just ask you to tell me a little bit your story.
So where we are right now, like it looks like a little bit in the middle of nowhere, but it's actually a very particular place.
So tell a little bit about.

**J.Heers:**
We're in a basement in a very particular place called Greenville, South Carolina, which is the deep south.
In fact, I had a dinner last night with a whole bunch of black folks who have lived here on the other side of the tracks.
If people are listening outside of the United States, that's that implies segregation.
The old segregation laws were on the other side of the tracks in a town called Greenville, in a restaurant called Capey.
So Capey is the Georgian word.
And here we're very close to Georgia, the state in the south of the United States.
So our fundamental location is very near Georgia in South Carolina in a restaurant called Capey, which means table in Georgian language.
And we are doing supra, which is a type of dinner, and we're doing it for anyone who shows up, but who shows up are generally Americans, very interested in community.
And so on one level, what we're doing is offering hospitality, which sounds dumb, except for one thing.
Hospitality is medicine.
And I think right now it's the most important medicine.
That's.
Offered in any way to anyone in the Western world.
In other words, it's the medicine necessary, not the stuff at the hospital, not the Rockefeller's oil pills.
This is the medicine most needed for these people called Americans and Westerners in 2026.
So I think we're offering medicine.
How about that?

**P.Shchelin:**
That sounds as part of the truth.
Good.
That sounds as a part of the truth.
But I need to let's dig.
Deeper.
If there is a medicine, then there is a sickness.
I guess we will need to express, like at least mention, like what's the medicine we're talking about?
What's the sickness we are talking about?
And I will challenge you a little bit on one thing, just even to bring it bigger.
Like, though there is no contradiction, because you mentioned like Americans, Westerners, which is true, like obviously true.
But it provides an easy escape for everybody.
Like if I'm not an American or if I'm not a Westerner, I don't need this medicine.
What I want us to dig, basically, America is a particular case of it's pretty much universal disease, which we can call, I would suggest we can call modernity for now.
If not, we can find something better.
But what it is, like again, we talk about modernity and for some people it's a positive thing.
But, spoiler, I agree with you.
It has a very huge disease element, but not the disease we usually notice.
It's kind of unnoticeable disease.
So, talk about it.

**J.Heers:**
I think probably you're right about one thing.
It's probably not a problem for the Western world.
It's a problem for fallen human beings.
Because there's a break in communion in the Christian narrative.
That's the big problem.
So, I think God gave us the table, which is an image of unity as a way back to health.
So, I like...
I like that.
But I think in particular because of atheism, the West has particularly suffered because what we were sold as deism, a type of godly belief, was never such.
We were just devoid of any table, of any real spiritual healing.
So, let me go back to what we do when we get to the medicine.
How about that?
If you want to really break it down, if you come to our restaurant, you can join a table on Friday nights for sure, often on Saturday.
Where you join people you don't know.
So, to be really particular, KP Restaurant seats you and your friend or your wife at a table with 25 other people, wives and friends, or not.
And then you commune together.
So, that's a particular thing going on at KP Restaurant.
And it's tied into our work as a non-profit.
But that work is the work of uniting people who don't think they're actually related.
So, this is another sickness in the West.
This hyper-autonomy, hyper-individualism has taught people that when they sit with people that they don't know, they have to come to agreement about, they have to come to a commonality based on what they do.
And so, the first question in America that people ask when they sit down, when you come tonight, you'll see.
You'll get someone you don't know next to you.
And then there'll be the tamada.
It's all very uncomfortable.
And then to get clean, by clean here what I mean is comfortable.
They're going to turn to you, a Russian guy, and go, what do you do?
And then if you have your elevator speech ready, because each American is an LLC.
And they have to have their own elevator speech about their own life.
So, well, I currently do marketing for a company here in Greenville.
And now that is supposed to be their signal to you that now tell me what you do so that we can have something in common.
But what the table and the Georgians do is they already know you have everything.
The table is just a place to uncover.
And it's not about what you do.
It's literally about the image of God in you.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's about who you are.

**J.Heers:**
It's about who you are.
But it's about antos.
It's about your very being, your ontology.
So, if you throw those words around at the supra, people get sad.
But the thing that's really happening is the tamada, the table, our restaurant, God willing, and our work abroad, which I can share.
It's all an ontology.
It's an uncovering of the old things.
The oldest thing being our common humanity, right?

**P.Shchelin:**
Common.

**J.Heers:**
That's the oldest.
Adam and Eve, this is us.
It's the oldest things being uncovered after they've been covered up for so many hundreds of years through this atheistic, Western, modern project.
What do you think about that?

**P.Shchelin:**
I think you're right, generally speaking.
And I think it wouldn't be then.
Basically, my role around this table is to...
Certainly, lift things up, and you will a little bit ground it.
And that's what happens around any real supra table, which we're going to talk about later.
So, if I lift it up, I would say the very reason the series is called the universal table is because you can...
We don't think about it this way, but the table is a model of universe.
And no matter what you do, you're already around this table.
And whenever you gather around the table, you are reminded.
Of this fact.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
So, that makes any table very practical.
Like, what I discovered, like, on top of other things, you have a problem, like, doing the elevator.
Actually, you're one of the few Americans who have problems doing...

**J.Heers:**
I think I do.

**P.Shchelin:**
I think you do.

**J.Heers:**
I think I do have a problem with that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, because what you do can only, as any true thing, can only be expressed in the paradox.

**J.Heers:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
The problem with the table is that...
The table is simultaneously a super simple thing, like what we have right now.
But hopefully, if the spirit provides, it will turn out to be very deep.

**J.Heers:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Whereas, in contrast, and we are trained in it, we talk about very complex but shallow things.
That's the wrong kind of doing.
So, what I basically was hearing, I like that you brought up the word do several times.
You say, what do you do?
What does...
What does the table do?
There is a lot of hidden nuances in the word do, which can go especially deep.
So, just as to lift it up, and I think it's central as a reminder, and why do I think it is a medicine, what happens around the table, it's not just about what do you do, American question.
What do you do?
That's the question of the table, because the centrality of the subject.
So, the person comes forward.
So, the person and the table and community born around this dance.
We don't see personality, like even though it's a wrong word, but we don't see personality as something belonging in the nature.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
We see the nature as something embedded in personality.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
And this heavy, pretty heavy and high theological concept is actually pretty visible.
And like, I mean, literally visible whenever you are around.
The table.
Do you want to jump in?
Do you want to give an example?

**J.Heers:**
You made me...
You made me think about something.
So, do, as I've been raised, and I, you know, I went to Columbia.
I did all this stuff that Westerners do.
And there's something about do in our mind that's equated with action.
Oh, good.
Let's look at these.
Oh, this is nice.
We're going to have a toast in a minute.
And it tends to be that we get our personality...

**P.Shchelin:**
Removed from the act of doing something.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.
Or another way to look at it is I begin to know your person, your personality, by your actions.
And what I've found from doing the Georgian Supra, which is...
I want to get into what actually happens.
But what I've found is the whole table is an attempt to not have that conversation.
It's a constant attempt to bypass you as what you'd act out.
Instead, it's you as me.
It's a type of bringing together that all of a sudden...
It doesn't get rid of my personality, but it asks me to transcend my personality or my...
What you know to be me.
It asks me to do...
For Buddhists out there that are listening, this is familiar.
You're trying to...
You're trying to...
Go past your material day by day into something special.
But for Christians, it's a little different.
It's like being...
Your true identity is being revealed as really, really close to your neighbor.
You're almost the same.

**P.Shchelin:**
But I would hear it a little bit because I think it's more...

**J.Heers:**
Good.

**P.Shchelin:**
I want to hear this.
Yeah, because I think it is a contrast because it's not about transcending or surpassing it.
Like it can be, and I think then it would turn into like weird spiritual meditation practice.
I think it is...
About embodying.
I think what good supra does, like it's...
You are called...
In fact, what is shown, like in anything you do, whenever you say a toast, it's about embodying the certain things a toast is about.
And it can be what you do, but you said this thing, which is actually very deep philosophical.
When we talk about, whenever using modern language about doing something, it's like my will to do something and the result of my actions.
Yes.
But me, myself is not in the results of my actions.
It's just the service.
Service is separate from the one who does it.
On a supra, even if I have to talk about something which I do, I can bring a toast about, let's say, what a beautiful table my friend John has made.
Like let's remember the artist who created this table.
That's right.
And then this material, pretty material thing is not removed and it's not even transcended.
Right.
But it's brought together.
Yes.
So that's what I say.
And this seems to be very simple and subtle, but it has, I mean, ultimately it's the most high level.
It's a difference between like cold, energy, actus, potentiality, like it's all there.

**J.Heers:**
So all of that, let me be the plebe.
I'll be the plebeian.
Okay.
All of that is just to say something like this, peace.
What I mean by peace is all of us know something's wrong.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
All of us.
Yes.
All of us know there's been a division.
There's been a fall.
I don't care what religion you so-called practice.
Every theology or every theanthropology, every conversation about God and man is something like I'm not that.
I'm not in that space of being united with my God.
And what you describe to me, and the Georgian Tamadas will say this, is the table invites you to Shvidoba, which is, oh, this is.
This is what I'm supposed to be like.
This is who I always am, even when I'm like worried I'm going to miss my plane and I'm not going to have enough money to pay rent.
This, oh, this is what I actually am, which is a communer or a person meant for communion.
And when you just taste it a little, just a little at the table, you can see Americans doing this when we throw these Georgian tables.
We try to keep the Georgian rule.
Okay.
And they're like, this is what they say, atheists often or secular will say, is this religious?
What they mean is, all the words you just said, but in the plebeian, in the voice of the commoner, what they mean is, this feels like you're trying to get me to know something beyond my own thoughts.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
You can play around the word.
It's a game you can say.
It's just supernatural.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.
That's right.
That's right.
That's right.
They sense it.
Everyone senses it.
And the Tamiraz in Georgia say, when you see that at the table, you've done what you're supposed to do as this commissioner of this oral tradition.
You've provided peace, but you didn't.
The Tamiraz didn't.
The table does.
What they mean by that is, if you think of the table as the place where everything is unified, symbolos.

**P.Shchelin:**
This is the altar.
It is an altar and an altar is the whole unity.
That's right.
And before we make a toast, just not on a plebeian way, but just to highlight this very difference, it's super important because I hear where I would argue not all traditions, not all traditions are equal, like not all theologies are equal.
Why super, I think, is specifically important and table is important.
For those, like I would honestly in the future just call, you do table.
You say you do hospitality, I would say.
We say that.

**J.Heers:**
We say that.

**P.Shchelin:**
You do a table.
Everybody has a table.
But what is important around this table, it's letting the relationship shine, letting the truest of you be, like that's what you expressed, like that's how I am.
But it's without this, quote unquote, liberating you.
So in a sense, you, on a good table, it's the fullest of you.
Like it's all the things you had, but in their fullest, most rich.
Most communal version of you.
And that's what is important.
So it's about actually keeping, transforming again, language play.
We think about transforming, let's get rid of something and make something new and better.
Table shows the best which is already there.
And that's important, I think.

**J.Heers:**
Well, I used to think all this stuff.
So I want you to know, I acquired, so this restaurant, KP Restaurant, is, we're a Georgian restaurant.
Mm-hmm.
But I'm an American.
I'm an American.
Yeah.
And then we have Ukrainian chefs because there are no Georgians around.
And they all worked in Georgian restaurants in the past when they were in the East.
And then we don't know what we're doing.
And then the whole idea was to start a restaurant.
I'm getting to your idea.
Was to start a restaurant in order to create offices for my nonprofit work called First Things Foundation.
But that work.
Just so you know, it's based on the exact same concept.
And it grows out of the exact same idea of the super, which is the way to heal yourself and to be of some use to others, right, is to sit still and commune.
You don't start with a project.
Like just any project, your project, the podcast project.
You don't go like this.
Hey, John, we've never met, but I know about your project.
And I really want to do a project with you.
I'd be like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Now, what happens is, is people do do business like that.
And, you know, how they get you or me to do the thing we want, because they have resources.
So ultimately, the resource is the way that we actually commune.
We don't actually commune in the way of the table.
We commune through the money.
And if I don't have the money, then you don't want to do business with me.
But that's not the way to do it.

**P.Shchelin:**
The way to do it is, first of all, it's not the only way to do it.
Radical thought.
And it's not proper.
OK, what do I mean by proper?
It's not what we are called to do.

**J.Heers:**
OK, good.
And can I say one thing?
And people out there who've traveled know this is true.
If you go to the rural parts of Russia, if you go to Georgia in general.

**P.Shchelin:**
Any old world place.

**J.Heers:**
Any old world.
Let's call it that.
It's dishonorable to do business the way I just described.
Yes.
It's not only not the only way.
It's a dishonorable way.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's a dishonorable way.

**J.Heers:**
In other words, it implies filth.
It implies dirtiness.
It implies something's wrong with your character.
You know what I mean?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
And I can even tell you.
It's beauty of tradition.
You don't have to know the name.
And that's an important point.
But ultimately, what you do is you inevitably have to do in this form of relationship is to reduce another side of the table to an object.
That's what is happening.
That's it.
You have to.
That's it.
It's two objects talking to each other.
And then you hopefully make a deal.

**J.Heers:**
Well, when we when we sort of go back when we started the restaurant as a way to create an office for our work around the world, which I want to tell you about.
But you know what happened?
You know what happened?
We got a real estate agent and he was a restaurant real estate.
So he knew about how restaurants work.
And so then we're looking for a place.
And he said, tell me about how your restaurant's going to work because I don't help me know what kind of place.
And we explained the restaurant, Georgian food.
He could figure out.
And I said, we're going to do the Supra.
Well, so now I got to explain this to this real estate agent who's communing with me through the money, not through interest.

**P.Shchelin:**
I can never make it.
He has a particular interest.

**J.Heers:**
There you go.
And I like to say it like, you know, like a commoner says it.
His first interest is the money.
The second interest is getting us what we what we need.
He's not a bad guy.
He's a good guy.
But what happened was, what do you think happened when I tried to explain that in our restaurant we're going to do Supra?

**P.Shchelin:**
It was a long and hard conversation, that's what happened.
He's laughing.

**J.Heers:**
He's like, I don't understand.
So you like people that don't know each other are going to sit together.
I'm like, yeah, we could go down the road.
Then when I said we're going to do a toast to the dead, he's like, yeah, no, don't do that.
He's like, no one wants to come to that.
And I'm like, well, the Supra is really good.
You got to experience it.
And you know what I lacked was a good elevator speech.
But I said, and this is what I want to get at, is we all said, not just me, we all said, it's going to work.
And we had to overcome his vision.
And when we did, it worked.
And the reason it worked is, going back to this, is the process in and of itself is generosity.
And when you come and you participate in generosity, you feel Sri Doba, peace.
And when you feel peace, you know what you've done?
You didn't just eat.
You entered a type of kingdom that is prepared for you.
Every image of heaven is a banquet.
Not every, but most of them.
Are banquets in scripture.
And so what is that about, Pasha?

**P.Shchelin:**
Oh, that's a lot about it.
It's about beings that precedes the quality of being in a way.
So you is first before what you are there.
Like what you are is present around the table.
But this is the centrality of a person around the table.
We live in a society where we have lots of cameras, like, you know, and different systems.
In terms of keeping track of anything, like, come on, people have watches that monitor the heart rate and people have like all of this horrible phone devices, they control all of the data and like, they basically send us.
So we are pretty like, we have lots of information about all of us and like, it's just a matter of effort, like how much information you want to get about each other.
But what completely not surprisingly happened is that actually we, as an individual, we, a reducible unity of soul, mind and body and the spirit became invisible.
Like where is the place when the last time you were visible?
When you didn't have the, because in what you do is not a full you.
You are in what you do, but you cannot be reduced to what you do.
You are not the sum of interests other people have in you or you have in other people.
The table, and that's what is scary about the table.
Guess what it's scary about?
It's a world.
It's a place where you are visible.

**J.Heers:**
This is the word we use vulnerable all the time.
Yes.
And you know who doesn't like it is it's like retired sort of like wasps, white Anglo Saxon Protestants who spent their whole 75 years reaching in vulnerability.
And now suddenly their wives dragged them to this dinner.
You should watch, you like philosophy, you should watch the philosophy at play.
It's fascinating.
What happens?
Like the first thing that happens is these old guys and they're sitting at this Georgian super run by an American.
The first thing that happens is they're angry that they have to be there.
The second thing that happens is they become, um, uncomfortable.
Like it feels emotional.
And then the third thing that happens after the toast to the dead is they love it because

**P.Shchelin:**
they're still human.
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
That's what I'm trying to say.
And that whole thing takes place.
And you can actually see the transformation.
The transformation of the people that are there.
And what I, let me just say something really practical.
This is what we're doing is we're just returning to a simple idea that whatever you've built in the world, whatever you've done, how much money you've made is fine and dandy.
But like you said, it's a type of energy.
That's not you.
It's a, it's an expression of you, but it's not truly you at full.
And most people know this already, but here is a tricky part.
They know it.

**P.Shchelin:**
We know it.
We don't know it, but we refuse to know it.

**J.Heers:**
Well, like we don't want to investigate it.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's like this, uh, you know, like scratching, like somewhere in, like in the corner of your ear, some like, or in the corner of your eye.
So it's like a shadow in the corner of your eye.
Basically it's like a hidden secret.
Everybody has it, but we pretend we don't.

**J.Heers:**
Can I, can I pick on that for a second?
Can I pick on that?
Did I pick up on that idea?
Why?

**P.Shchelin:**
Why?
Oh, I, I have a theory.

**J.Heers:**
I have a theory too.
But that's what I want to say it, it to me is just like really obvious.
It's because somewhere along the line, we actually started to believe that we are our own.
In other words, the teaching of atheism, secularism, whatever it is, and I'm not, I know working in Africa that when you meet someone who is it West African, they believe in God.
I don't know which one.

**P.Shchelin:**
They definitely believe it somehow.

**J.Heers:**
But the idea that they could possibly begin to understand themselves as they are their own.
And when they die, they go into the grave and that is the end.
I believe that idea contributes to this inability to, to enjoy Supra.

**P.Shchelin:**
Or it's even worse.
But like, it's a first layer because it would be already bedded.
If it were just.
the way you describe it, but we cannot escape our nature.
So what we end up doing, we're still worshipping, but dishonestly, in a sense.
So what I mean...

**J.Heers:**
Or a lesser god.

**P.Shchelin:**
Or a very lesser god.
But a person can't live...
Like, I can talk that I live in this ultimately material world, but because of my nature as a human, I still need to prioritize something over the other things.
And ultimately, everyone in their life has something that's most important.
Well, this is the most important thing in your life, is what is holy to you.
So ultimately, you don't even live this way.
You're just depriving yourself of all of the good parts.
We all live carrying, let's say, it as a boring part of worship.
Like, everybody does it.
Oh, I like that.
That's built in.
It doesn't matter what you think about yourself, you're still worshipping something, and you're bearing the burdens of this worship.
For example, you worship money.
Like, sorry, you want financial security, you worship your financial security.
You will carry the burdens of sacrifice.
You will sacrifice your time, effort, money to this purpose, but you won't be able to truly enjoy it.
Like, because you don't think about it in a religious way.
So...
And everybody does something...

**J.Heers:**
But there's another reason you won't enjoy it, is that...

**P.Shchelin:**
It's not high enough.

**J.Heers:**
It's not a great god.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's not a great god, even if you kind of like...
It's not bad.

**J.Heers:**
I mean, driving in a clean car, going really fast, and listening to loud music, that type of...
That type of acquisition, that thing that you got from your worship, that's nice.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's nice, but it's not good enough.
Like, as you said, it's not good enough.
The moment you see it as worship, it's not good enough.
Like, that's a tricky point.

**J.Heers:**
Well, that's the problem.
You can't see it as worship, or you're going to ruin your god.
That's what's crazy.
It's like a magic trick.
As soon as you realize...
The way you said it, by the way, people in common culture, they would just go like this.
The people I know would be like, it's not worship.
I don't worship a god because I go to work, and I really want to worship God.
I want the house, and the whole point of my life is to get the house.
That's not worship.
Well, I'm like, sorry, it is.
And you know why they can't say it's worship?
Well, because they know their god sucks at that point.
Because they just like, it's empty.
It's empty.

**P.Shchelin:**
There is no really good part in it.
And that's what I wanted to bring to.
So I said, well, we all worship nowadays, but since we can't escape the worshiping, so we all end up carrying the bad part, like heavy parts of it.
But what about the good parts?
Well, ultimately not much.
Well, what about the good parts?
Well, what table does, it's good parts of it.

**J.Heers:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Joyful, merry part.
That's right.
Visible part.
Like being the full part.
That's what the trick, not the trick, but that's where the mystery, let's say, let's suppose, like there are tricks and there are mysteries.
Yeah, I like that.

**J.Heers:**
I like that.
You know, there's sort of a, Tamada is an oral tradition in Georgia.
So you can be one.
It's not like you gotta get certified.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
It doesn't work like that.
In the neighborhoods, people sort of know.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, you're having a birthday?
You know, go get kakaladze.
He knows.
He'll be your tamada.
Or if you're getting married, then my uncle will do it.
He's not tamada.
Maybe get your grandfather.
It's like this.
But all the tamadas in all the regions, they have a traditional understanding.
They always say, when people start to leave your table, it's because something happened.
And if they leave before the toast to the dead, something really bad, which is you weren't capable of appealing to their humanity.
That's not the way they would say it.
But they would say something like, you weren't human enough.
Or you talk too much about yourself.
Which is code for not being human enough, you know.
Narcissism is a type of dying, right?
It's a type of shrinking.

**P.Shchelin:**
A shrinking because of...

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.
It feels like it's a type of going out, but it's a type of shrinking.
Your soul is shrinking.
And when people are actually giving of themselves is when they grow, not when they're trying to take from everybody else attention.
But I would say this.
The tamadas know that there's a pattern.
And the pattern is when you offer yourself properly, then people stay.
And so the table becomes...
It's really cool.
The table becomes a healing place because the tamada was able to empty himself for the other.
And this is the pattern of creation.
It's the pattern.
It's the pattern of health.
It's the pattern of...
For me, it's the pattern of how we know ourselves through purification, illumination.
We empty ourselves.
We get rid of the things that we know aren't good for us, but also we deny ourselves of things.
And that's the role of the tamada.
And so what I want to say in a big picture is at the restaurant, we're doing something that's just not done very often in an atheistic slash, let's call it...
Secular.
It's a reformational Christian setting.
It's not done.
It's not done.
This isn't how we know God.
Do you understand?

**P.Shchelin:**
No, I know.
You speak totally correctly.
Just like you touched so many different angles, like any direction to go.

**J.Heers:**
Let's do a toast real quick.
Do you want to?
Yes.
We needed to do it.
We needed to do it.
Let's toast to the things we've been given, to all the blessings we have, which include the soul in you that allows you to push breath in the form of...
Even the ability to make meaning was given to us.
And so to all that we've been given, Gagimarchos.

**P.Shchelin:**
Gagimarchos.

**J.Heers:**
Gagimarchos.
