# Universal Table Part IV - Hair of The Dog

May 08, 2026 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XdMpwVdLT7M) 01:02:12

After surviving the night of supra, narrowly avoiding casualties, Pavel Schelin and John Heers return to the table to discuss wine, death, and true peace.

**J.Heers:**
Tell me about your children.
Tell me about death.
And I have to look you in the eye.
No, I might want to drink wine to get over that idea, because maybe I've had many people die in my life.
But that's okay.
But what I really have to get over is what you think about me.

**P.Shchelin:**
All of it.
Like, it's all, as you said, it's space, the universe.
Because if I do the chain of all of the relationships you've had in your life, it will be universal.
Especially when there are 25 people around the table, just mathematically, like, it actually will be universal.
But also, it's kind of universally back, quote unquote, but also universally forward, because children, all of the future possibilities.
Right, that's great.
Is to effectively stop the time.
I'm sorry.
Interesting.

**J.Heers:**
Well, I was going to open a beer, because I was told by the producer to open it.
This is called, what are they called?
Hair of them.
Yeah, it's like, enjoyable.
When they do cha-cha in the morning, hair of the dog, that's it.

**P.Shchelin:**
The relationship between humans and alcohol nowadays is weird.
So, first level of weirdness is this weird shame of alcohol.
Because there should be some shame of alcohol, but we drop the good shame and put this, you call it Puritan, so I may be not allowed to say it, but I will just quote you on it.
Puritan.
Yeah.
But the idea is like, oh, you don't do this on camera.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Or this is offensive.
Not even offensive, but that's immodest or very, very, very, very low.
And again, I can totally understand where it's coming from.
I mean, America is just a story of prohibition, but on a deeper symbolic level, too much alcohol, too much wine can lead to too much chaos.
And around the table, it can lead to too much chaos, but still it's necessary.
That's where I want to go, because this Puritan attitude towards alcohol, the idea of a drug that has something to do with a person, or a woman, or a man, let's say, is not a royal pass.
It's a covert pass.
It's like, let's pretend we can just put a ban on it, and by this fear, it will keep us safe.
So it's trading something very important for the false safety.

**J.Heers:**
Is it pretending?
Pretending that the alcohol … If we never participate in it, then we've essentially killed it by hiding it?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.
I think that's it.

**J.Heers:**
Because I don't think it's sin in and of itself.
Ah, here is the tricky part.

**P.Shchelin:**
I don't think so.
In the Hundred and Third Psalm, it says that wine marries the heart of a man, and bread strengthens the spirit.
So, let's look into this married heart.
I think this is where is the key.
We are fallen creatures.
We are.
I take it.
And the idea is like a married heart, it's what we are called to have constantly, but it's not actually what we do.
And that's the symbolic, very important role of wine.
You need this push to marry up your heart, but you need to do it proper.
And that's what I think why hiding is not a solution.
Doing a feast is a solution.
Don't drink alone.
And that's why I find American culture weird, like drinking alone.
Even if you are in a pub, you all drink alone effectively.

**J.Heers:**
Well, you shifted the symbolism there from the wine being for a married heart and a married heart coming from union with man to wine being a dulling effect because it's creating isolation in the man alone.
The wine deepens the depression when alone, but together it increases the, let's call it the communion or the theosis.
Because we're together now, the wine can do its job.
Alone, the wine can't do its job.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's beautiful.
It is a great way.

**J.Heers:**
But that's last night at the table.
A woman leaned over to me.
This is fascinating.
This is also something my GM was asking me about.
And she said, this isn't really Christian because you guys are drinking a lot of wine.
Think about the inversion in that.
It's quite interesting because you were at the table last night.
You saw it was 25 people, the public.
There were different groups.
People didn't know each other.
Did you think people were drunk last night?

**P.Shchelin:**
No, I haven't seen any drunk person.

**J.Heers:**
I didn't think so either.
She said though, she goes, your words sound Christian, but I can tell this isn't a Christian thing because you're drinking wine.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's very sad.
That's wild.
It's wild.
It's quite sad to me to hear.
And weird, sad and weird because it is a Christian thing to do.
Anybody who knows the story of the soup room, it's one of the oldest Christian traditions.
And it's a general tradition of feasting.
Again, we will talk about it more, but as you said, the image of heaven is the image of a feast.
And don't you think there is wine during this?

**J.Heers:**
It's the first miracle.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's the first miracle.

**J.Heers:**
Now, maybe Christ said, here's the water.
I made it into wine.
Don't drink too much.
It's possible.
I don't have all the context.
I just know what Scripture says.
He didn't seem worried about that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, it was not the thing.
I think what we need to be worried, you already pointed it out, whether the wine leads to the merriment of the heart or is it a depressant.
Depressant that keeps you alone.
And that's what is the true challenge.
And that's the real opposition.
You can notice that this opposition cannot be solved by avoidance because the question is a question of the heart.
I can imagine, let's say, Supra where very little wine is actually drinking.
I can imagine it.
You can imagine.
I can imagine because imagine like it's a group of old friends and the heart is already.
It is so merry.
This is it.
You're already so abundant.
You need basically effectively only communion.
This is it.
Just the tiniest, like tiniest amount of blood which to open up your heart and to let the spirit pour through you.
But just speaking from experience, like I throw several tables.
You throw way more table.
I would say for us, from a person of a new world, our heart is like an atrophy.
It's like we have a gym for a body.
We don't have really a gym for the heart.
So just to start this old motor running, two, three glasses, like from my experience, two, three glasses over a course of an hour to just heart starting to open.

**J.Heers:**
Well, it's just what happens.
I've done hundreds of these tables.
So I have two memories, distinct memories.
One from Zapata, which is a monastery in Georgia in the southwest.
And then the other is from the monastery.
Why am I forgetting right now?
Oh, in Foca where Saint Nilo first arrived.
The very first step she took into implanted the cross.
In Foca.
In both of those cases, the abbot got together with his monks.
And in one case, the abbot was the tamada.
In the other case, it was another one of the elder monks.
And we did supra.
And it's just what you said.
The wine was consumed.
But let me put it like this.
Could I tell that anybody was drunk?
No.
Did they drink enough wine to possibly be drunk?
Yes.
But just that my mind is trying to do math on the drunk equation is so odd.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's so odd.
Because the question is like, you cannot put it into number.
It's all about the heart.
The wine reveals the heart.
And that's where the community parts in.
Heart around your brothers.
That's why drinking alone, it's not a sin, but it's a tragedy.
Drinking in a communion, it's a mutual vulnerability.
It's a language of honor.
You honor people around your table.
You don't want to be drunk around the table.
And that's self-evident, actually.
The reason we even suggest it's not self-evident is already the sign of how little we trust ourselves and the people around us.

**J.Heers:**
To emphasize that, when we do supers here, when we train tamadas, we want everybody to get trained in the whole world.
I actually think this is a universal table.
The Georgians happen to have produced it.
But the tradition is the tamada should drink the most and appear the least drunk.
There should be nobody at the table that drinks more than the tamada.
Now, I can't keep up.
Because in Georgia, you're not tamada three times a week.
No.
It's unusual.
You know what I mean?
But it's fascinating that that's the spirit of it, because it implies what you just said, is we should be married, but we shouldn't be stumbling around.
I got a question for you.
Can I throw a really practical question at you?
It involves a good friend of mine, who's also my brother, and he's also a priest, Father Peter, and he hears.
And so we were doing a movie shoot with Tucker Carlson.
The movie is still, I have a meeting this week to find out more about where we're going next, called Christianities.
And in the movie, we arrived at Tucker Carlson's house.
And we spent all day with him.
And we got great footage.
But in the night before, my brother there, who's one of the producers, and then the director, Scooter, and I, and the music producer, Neil, is there.
And Tucker smokes cigars.
Got it?
Yeah.
And the director says, let's smoke cigars with Tucker.
And I'm like, absolutely, because I smoke cigars.
In fact, we might have one in a minute.
And so guess what?
It was a great idea.
The lighting, the cigars.
The reality is, there's two guys.
I'm older than Tucker.
We're about to have a nice conversation with cigars.
And my brother shut it down.
And to this day, I don't know the answer.
I don't know.
Cigars and cigars, let's just lump them together for a second.
His argument was, you can't do things on screen.
You can't project into the world things that human beings probably should not participate in.
You can't willingly, in preparation, crack open a beer knowing that beer is potentially dangerous for those who are about to consume it, or who are about to consume your video, your media.
And we had an argument.
Not just he and I, but the whole crew was like, what is this to us tomorrow?
So you want to know my answer?
But I want to know.
Well, no, you give me your answer.
As a philosopher?

**P.Shchelin:**
As a philosopher, I think, no, that won't be a philosophical answer.
That will be, sorry, a personal answer.

**J.Heers:**
And I just say, before you answer, in his defense, he wasn't trying to make, he wasn't like quoting the Holy Fathers.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He did a little bit, actually.
That surprised me.
He, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he, he was willing to say for you, for you, do what you gotta do.
I don't want to make the impression he was walking around laying law.
But boy, he was struggling with this, for me.
I'll give you my answer.
What, what, what is that?

**P.Shchelin:**
It is a dance.
I think it's, I can definitely understand where it's coming from.
And to an extent, it's a crossing.
I think any person who speaks in public bears, if he is honest, like.
Because everything like, you, you are pouring sinks in the water.
And the fruits are not always what you intended.
Let me put it this way.
But again, to me, I think personally, there are two key questions I would ask myself first.
Does this help this moment, like even on camera, to become more full?
I would put it this way.
That's why they cannot be here.
Here, you cannot have a universal answer.
So the universal answer is like, in the story you told me, I would go with it.
Not because of the singers themselves, but because based on the story you told me right now.
It sounds like this scene is more full of you and more full of Tucker.
But at this moment, it's you and Tucker are telling the story, not versions of you.

**J.Heers:**
I see this.

**P.Shchelin:**
This is the first part.
And the second part is this leap which we're talking about.
I think whenever you air anything, like any podcast or any conversation with another person, you have to have a certain trust.
I choose to trust people who watch my videos and your videos.
I tend to trust because otherwise I will just shut up, honestly.
If I think about every possible angle my words can be interpreted, it's terrifying.
I mean, I can understand very well why.
It's even higher, like more aesthetic path just to be silent.
Like, basically, there is a reason monks are silent.
Let me put it this way.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
And I can definitely build a convincing argument for it.
But since I'm not, and I don't think monasticism is the only path.
Like, then the second best, I think, what we can strive to, just to be as sincere, as honest as we can be on camera.
And if this scene is a step towards this.
Not that it's more symbolic, it's a step towards symbolism and not to virtuality, let's say, you're not creating an image of cool guys drinking or an image of cool guys in a leather chair with a cigar, even though there is an image of it.
So if you're questioning your heart, yeah, like, am I doing it because I like the image and I like the picture?

**J.Heers:**
I'll go back to it.
So my answer was that I felt like because Tucker smokes.
And because I smoke, and I've had great conversations when I was sitting with Cigar, that it would probably be very advantageous toward the authenticity of the conversation.
So my argument to my brother was, I think you're curating it as per an image of orthodoxy in your mind.
And he's like, exactly.
He's like, that's what this is.
The whole thing is all the.
The shots we're going to do when we go interview Russell Brand or whoever, they're all curated in order to give the spirit of the orthodoxy.
And I responded, and so did the guys on the team, which is, what if I don't have the spirit of orthodoxy?
I can't be the person you want me to be in the conversation.
So I now I'm going to be reduced to asking orthodox style questions when I am not fully curated as an orthodox Christian.
And he said, that's true.
And also don't smoke a cigar because the saints don't smoke cigars.
I don't know that there's a right answer, but I can say this, the spirit, we didn't do it.
The answer is we didn't do it.
We succumb or you can, we respected his role in the film and he didn't want that.
And we did it.
And it was, I think it was some pretty cool stuff happened.
I don't think we would have done anything wrong if we smoked cigars together.

**P.Shchelin:**
Again, based on the story I heard, you show a different virtue and there is a virtue of humility.
Obviously it's the cross your brother has to bear based on the choices you make me personally, I definitely see your perspective more closer.
I think, especially nowadays, it's not like it is about the image, but in a higher sense, like we already have too many made images, like trying to be like, without this rugged edges, you know what I mean?
Like what you're talking about?
Yes.
Now the image is this like.
Like, and in its fullness and its vulnerability in its ruggedness and its ages, and, um, I would personally follow with it, but it's sometimes different styles and sometimes it is speaking of like to the table, like it is also part of the table part.
And isn't it the choice in a way that Tamada makes every time you hit it right there.

**J.Heers:**
It's really the same exact dilemma of the Tamada at the table that's directing the day, because sometimes you're going to have to lean into something that is on its face.
Not quite, let's call it orthodox.

**P.Shchelin:**
Sometimes you need to tell.
A dirty joke.

**J.Heers:**
This is what we did last night.
We did.
I did tell a dirty joke.
And by the way, I got pushed back on that from another person.
Well, actually from the same guy, from my dear beloved friend, Evan, he said, that doesn't feel like Christian to tell a joke that's, and it was really the same conversation.
And I'll give you another one in Georgia.
Traditionally, when a priest comes to a supra now, this isn't in the monastery, it's different in the monastery.
This won't happen.

**P.Shchelin:**
But.

**J.Heers:**
Let's just say.
They had a big restaurant or at someone's house and there's a big table laid out.
The priest will come, he'll spend first toast, second, fifth, sometimes he'll pray first, second, third, fourth, fifth at the fifth toast is always to those who have fallen asleep.
And then what happens is, is the tradition is the priest will leave after the toast to children, which is often the toast right after the toast to the dead.
And then they leave and everybody knows he's leaving.
The symbolism is.
I've blessed the table.
Seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, all the way into the morning is probably not for me, but the symbolism is not stop.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes.

**J.Heers:**
So I had a very beloved person who supports our, our work.
Um, she is not Orthodox and she's very aware of the drinking culture, uh, and was personally impacted by it in her own life with her family.
And, and she said, I love this.
But I want you when we return to not drink alcohol after the fifth toast, because she was intimating and anticipating that priestly leaving, but she associated the continuance of it with too much consumption of alcohol.
And so what, what's really fascinating is, is she's doing the priest leaving, but she's trying to control the situation in a way that it changes the entirety of the table.
It's kind of wild.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's wild, but it's also understand because that's a tragedy.
Like it's our common tragedy of this, uh, not Mary heart.
Like we talked yesterday and we, about this whole vulnerability element, because it all comes back down to it.
It's about trust.
It's about faith.
It's about vulnerability.
You trust that you, you have to trust that basically it's, and it's interesting because it's always this dance and a pattern of true authority.
Like me sitting at the table.
Like I need to trust them.
Yeah.
As I said, I need to trust that even if me personally, maybe I don't like for a moment, the joke, I need to humble myself when you are a crew member, you need to trust your brother, even though you might disagree with him personally for very good reason.
But at the moment, I think the trust itself is way more important, whether it's a chain of logical arguments you can create.
And I think I won't come back to it because I think that as a key that's, we constantly missing and that's what table challenges and why it's a gym and why it's necessary and why it's universal.
It's restoring the ontology of relationship, relationship to the guest, relationship to the host, to the king, to the servant, like they all come first.

**J.Heers:**
Is it reordering or ordering again?

**P.Shchelin:**
I think it's more like ordering again, reordering, no, but ordering more like remembering.

**J.Heers:**
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's about remembering, like, and as an any act of remembrance, it can't happen the way it was like, that's the thing, because we are not like, and that's what would be my biggest argument to say.
Like, yeah, maybe it would be great and it would be more orthodox if John Hughes wouldn't smoke a cigar.
Maybe he does.
That's the thing.
So now the question is, how do you make a jump of vulnerability, so orthodoxy shining in this man and this particular woman?
And that's what people crave.

**J.Heers:**
Like, actually, I think, I think true Christianity leads into the freedom more than it leads into the remembrance of the rule.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's not about remembrance of the rule.
It's remember, I think the truth is like, it's like we need to remember.
Why the rule is it's tricky, not the rule, but what the rule is pointing to, to the spirit which produced the rule.

**J.Heers:**
So to point it out, I've never seen a priest at a soup or leave, you know, around the six toasts and then say, and remember, we're not meant to get drunk.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's implied in self-evident.

**J.Heers:**
He's trying to honor the freedom of the people who are staying in saying right and not saying the rule.
Mm-hmm.
Because he, he.
Wants to lean into the freedom more than into the rule.
And I think the Western mind loves the classroom.

**P.Shchelin:**
Oh yeah.

**J.Heers:**
Which is a didactic approach to me teaching you.

**P.Shchelin:**
It is the law.
It's not the law.

**J.Heers:**
It's, it's, it's, it's like Catholic law, right?
It's no offense to the Catholic where you can feel it in a culture.
Yeah.
I've got disinvested of that, of, of that, that teacher Marm person looking.
Yeah.
Down, I don't like it.
What I find is the default for most people is if they can just understand the rule.

**P.Shchelin:**
Mm-hmm.

**J.Heers:**
Everything will be fine.

**P.Shchelin:**
That's a danger of any tradition.
That's how tradition becomes conservative.

**J.Heers:**
Right.

**P.Shchelin:**
When we put value in the rule, not to the universal principle, which the law is kind of all the rule is supposed to help us remind us.
I'm not saying that there shouldn't be no rule, but ultimately yeah, the goal is to.
transcend the rule like that's the thing the goal is to embody like to embody it in a way that

**J.Heers:**
no letter can express so the rule is is mustard seeds yeah shouldn't move mountains yeah that's one that's physics that's physics but we're instructed that we can with the faith of a mustard seed move a mountain we're supposed to blow that rule up on some point there is really only one

**P.Shchelin:**
rule right love God love your neighbor which is not even a rule like that's the thing it's it's a rule but it's not the rule it's absurdity you can't make love a rule like even if I wanted to like it's all crazy it is a rule you can make a rule don't drink okay you can make it a rule like it's an action nothing about the heart can be turned into a rule our culture especially generally modern culture is missing this health is skepticism and healthy rejection of the rule health healthy I'm saying unhealthy unhealthy is to reject the rule to my own will like that's a healthy relationship right uh healthy is also rejected to my say transformed will or submitted well right that's a house but none of them law is like just it's it's a stepping it's a stepping stone it's a place in between but you know you know where I've come with this as as automata

**J.Heers:**
okay this is maybe why you have me on your podcast I love seeing it at the table no I I just love seeing it last night I saw us you could see it so this is this is what I'm saying so like this this might be helpful to people that are listening because this is what really in the end what we're first things is trying to do is be a hospitality machine horrible I don't like machine but it's it's to ebb hospitality and remember it um so that we can bypass the actual machine which is the machine that is anti-hospitality anti-generosity and it's all about efficiency the modern machine so we're just trying to like battle the the machine that is modernity by offering this other type of event called hospitality which is healing which is the hospital but what I've noticed using the Supra as the the vehicle so there's lots of vehicles to love I just happen to be involved in one that vehicle there's rules to the table like you really shouldn't there's certain ways to toast after Tom and us toast but did you notice last night at the table there's types there's types of people that are that sat down fashioned by life before I got to meet them yes so let's just say that that's the beginning of heaven it's the first moment in heaven is sitting at the table but everyone came with a different tipos like there's a different type of person did you you notice one end of the

**P.Shchelin:**
table was had a certain yeah I mean every like several you can see around the tables there were like five different uh circles like one couple was confirming their

**J.Heers:**
own tipos to the other person in the couple in other words when I was offering a vulnerable toast on love you could see that some of the people would double down on their type on their being and confirm to each other I'm not gonna toast this this is dumb or the turn the you're my partner I've turned you go what is going on here or like yeah this is amazing isn't it and I use actually the role of human beings okay this is this is the Royal the Royal path and also it's like the lordly invite for all of us to become the most noble of beings is before you do anything else with laws and rules understand the tipos understand the person who stands in front of you scared person right wounded person joyful maybe insecure you don't have to name it in the Freudian garbage way no all that garbage because it's already a reduction like you're already reducing it but you feel it you have to you should use the you should use the Christian template to understand people what passions are are eating them up and here's

**P.Shchelin:**
another one what passions are eating you up oh I can tell speaking about passions like honestly one thing hidden why it is important to be around common table and one thing and I think it's like well the reason we don't do tables anymore like or not as often table is actually a great um antidote to jealousy because whenever Tamada offers a toast it's not either directly about you or you might not really fit well in the toast description example let's say you do a toast to a happy marriage and you have a divorce a person who recently divorced oh my boy it's rough and what we want to do we want to avoid this experience like generous but we want to avoid it and uh without facing the passion that's the best antidote to the passion of jealousy which I discovered in the long run you just start okay maybe like it's just reminding it exists like this good still exists and you can see this embodied people he lit a little fire you got to pass

**J.Heers:**
through it a little bit but it'll burn off some of the the anger of that experience that he's he's reminding you about because marriage is good yes your marriage might have been bad yes but the idea of marriage is good and that I would toast it and you would be upset that speaks to you as

**P.Shchelin:**
you said December can actually what can help you to grow and heal like that's you've been talking

**J.Heers:**
that's what I love about super the Tamada while trying to do the right toast for the table yes also has to maintain let's call it reality they don't really get to toast into just any sort of passing idea that ever happened they try to go for these very Eternal themes and you know what when you do that with a modern let's call it um a modern people that aren't they're loosely attached to the ancient ideas it really challenges them I mean

**P.Shchelin:**
very simple question if it's not about me why should I care well that's what happens on the

**J.Heers:**
Toasted Children yes most people who come to the suit are Supra because you know it's not it's not zero dollars you got to pay they've achieved some sort of place in life and they're successful not all but and that usually means they don't have children or they have one oh it's not wild so when I toast the children to 25 people who basically don't have any uh-huh they don't like it they're like could we toast to our dogs oh that almost always happens didn't happen yesterday didn't happen last night yeah but I have not seen two or three tables in a row when they're Community tables if it's a bunch of Orthodox people they don't really go there right or if it's a big business we once said Microsoft don't be mad it wasn't Microsoft I shouldn't really put it out there who it was but anyway we did it with a group let's just call them highly powerful people and they asked in advance that we not toast the children because it's triggering oh yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
okay let's dig trigger I think that's the thing the point of a Supra and that's part of remembering is to trigger to like quote unquote trigger and it's our desire not to be triggered that's really good like uh it's like the wine wine is supposed to marry an expensive heart wine is supposed to trigger on some service on some level there is a triggering element you can't run away from triggering that's what super does like but why it matters and why would it matter for people like still whatever because language you know all of these complaints about um let's say some people complain about modernity some people complain about chaos some people complain about left right different vices or whatsoever whatever or just simply like that for some reason there is no heaven on Earth right here right now uh well so one of the reasons that the only language you can talk about it is the language quote unquote safe let me put it it might be easy but it won't be safe what I mean super talks in the eternal categories like honor that's right sacrifice love children this is what I mean but that's why the table is universal and it's these topics this is this language if you start looking on other relationship in your life through these lenses suddenly they start making sense they actually start seeing where is the wound you start seeing where is it is this you start seeing like what is happening but the true but it is yes a triggering part is you might not mind you will

**J.Heers:**
sacrifice a lot in the process what did you think about last night did we get to this we had about I guess 26 people uh three or four that had done it before um three or four Orthodox yes so it was

**P.Shchelin:**
pretty good example of what you do and as part of one I would say did I would say did it work visibly for everyone I work here you mean it created vulnerability in love yes yes uh I think for some people it stayed weird on the surface but here is a tricky part of super which you know from experience you never know the fruit might be in a

**J.Heers:**
year or two or three so that one I want to say that there isn't like a success metric for super if if anybody out there starts going I had a bad table I oh my favorite time at all mamuka would you wait did everyone go to bed safely like you didn't have a bad there's no such thing as this yeah it's a very weird thing you're not doing a psychological trick on somebody you're trying to have a table trying to have dinner so I want to make that really clear however philosophically we

**P.Shchelin:**
can talk about things that happen you know what I mean yeah so some I think so any table as and someone does use this language is a sitting against the figure of power you put in things which coming from above through you but you don't control the outcome but sometimes you see again starting your experience you can see that fruits camp can come up pretty quickly and yesterday we saw it and that was a very particular moment which I noticed when the table generally popped up and guess when it happened fifth toast I think it clicked do you

**J.Heers:**
think that's in part because there's a suppression of death in general in in our culture I think it's gross last night it's like we we ignore this we ignore so it's time to I think it's an ultimate

**P.Shchelin:**
vulnerability I can suppress my vulnerability around kid I can suppress my vulnerability about my spousal relationship about my work and I can still psychologize it uh ultimately it's about

**J.Heers:**
and nobody can really suppress isn't that what drives a lot of everything we do right yeah that's

**P.Shchelin:**
the ultimate coveredness because I mean let's say I think this is a pattern like of any like even wine or excess like let's avoid the risk of death in white like there is always a possibility of death in any phenomenon while we're like here oh yeah in a sinful man but it's precisely facing it in a way Supra does or in a way of we remember it that actually creates this freedom like it's precisely after this moment if you face it then you can start living again I was not surprised when it happened after the fifth and that's why the fifth is so essential we talked a lot about through the philosophy of it but it just also happens from experience it's about the dust of the dead when like uh even people who are wounded and uh because ultimately all of my wounds kind of go whale against this face and then we can we can joke and then we can isn't that interesting yeah that's what

**J.Heers:**
happens my American friends will say that's because people have been drinking wine for an hour and a half but I just know that's not it's not I know that's not the case um and also can I just talk about the mechanics of the traditional Georgian Supra which which will help us understand how Georgians drink um and I think this is super important for people who were bent towards cynicism um because they're like come on what's happening is a bunch of people drinking wine and they're having a nice time you don't have to get deep but I will say this I disagree and here's one reason the traditional way that you and I would drink pour or or cha-cha pretty full yeah and then I would drink yeah and then our toast to children and then in toasting the children I would drink all of my wine and then if it's a table of 10 or 20.
everyone who wants to toast the children would also drink all of their wine so now someone's going what all of it yeah all of it so I put it down it's finished but I noticed that you held yours you didn't drink on my toast I said beautiful words I did Earth somebody oh look you held it and now what that's telling me is you want to call you want my toast you want to continue what we started so I said the children I drink mine to the end I'm done my friend next door drank it to the end they're finished but you held yours what you're saying is may I have that and then I say please sagra Zello and then you say I want to toast to my son to my whatever I don't know whoever you're going to toast a child toast to to to Innocence then after you toast but we're all standing there you finished yours down oh he held his too he finishes his down and then I look everybody has an empty everybody's finished their glass is all empty now the melekipe or your neighbor you don't pour your own drink at a Supra boom boom we fill it pretty solid again now you don't touch it you don't touch it you don't touch it until the automata decides to bless the table with logos with meaning the meaning comes down and then it meets with the material the wine my toast invigorates the wine and the wine invigorates the drinker but you shouldn't drink wine or alcohol between my toasts guys sometimes these dinners are like eight hours seven hours eight hours long so if you really think about the consumption of alcohol you're having maybe two glasses of now uh uh an hour maybe maybe maybe not even but that's not always the way it's done and it can get pretty wild it depends on the time it up but what makes us vulnerable is not the wine it's that we're sharing each other's highest moments because the time that I shared him with us tell me about your children tell me about death and I have to look you in the eye no I might want to drink wine to get over that idea because maybe I've had many people die in my life but that's okay but what I really have to get over is what you think about me who you are to me and I'm at a table for eight hours boy when you leave you are best friends you really are I'm talking about even with the guy there's always a Georgian guy that doesn't say anything he's just sitting there he's having fun he's in it he's an introvert yeah when I see that guy in the street the next day forget about it he's like my best friend

**P.Shchelin:**
we got to do it because you saw each other because that's the same side chat that's the same you saw of a function in the long run you would not just saw you saw in both vulnerable and mary moment and that's what when it pops that's why you need this ultimate vulnerability again in georgia like and again in a more old world yes technically it can start earlier just as an example we don't have to name death for us to become mary but i would say the reason why because this is already there again in the old world take any old world culture there is constant funeral somewhere like it's it's i'm sorry but there is like somebody's like it's not like funeral is happening in the closet like somewhere they're going through the middle of the town and you imagine if a town is big enough well it happens let's put it this way it's not just i'm heard of like and right and that's why it's kind of start even the first toast kind of starts in the presence of it already like you have it in you we already like we really put it into the box and this is the tricky part philosophically speaking why the table is universal that's maybe the biggest universality and that's at the same time the biggest loneliness uh because the only way for us not to be alone is to be connected not just spatially but temporally memory like the biggest just and it is remembering of meaning of this world on so many levels around the fifth toast is my departed uh it's not sensual but it's a feeling i can feel them actually being there with me present at my table and in this moment through facing this fear i should start myself fearless because it means that it's precisely because there is death there is no death like if there is a paradox right that's a universal right and what we do in outside of the universal pattern what we try to do we try to pretend which we basically we can endlessly prolong the time until we face this right and by this escaping it no it doesn't work on a theological pattern it doesn't want to work on ontological pattern there is no pattern in which it works it doesn't work in a material physical

**J.Heers:**
way yeah entropy sorry yeah entropy is happening yeah so last night when we toasted you remember we had the conversation that one of the things that we try to do as human beings is avoid death and then in that toast we can't avoid it but the other thing is is the people who have experienced it are brought to us yes it's almost like they're coaching us for that day yes when we remember them but the other thing is is the memories of the past are also brought in so there's a unity of the present the future if you like that word what what has happened to them but by remembering their names and maybe telling a story were also brought into the past and and time stands still it's not just standing

**P.Shchelin:**
still that's the tricky part i think it's obliterated it's obliterated but it kind of becomes more full because one of the trickiest questions like i think it's super is like when does super happen if you think about it super completely challenged like but as our life completely destroys the concept of time it was just our experience wow i just had the same thought

**J.Heers:**
without death there is no time right without death how can i know how old i am if i do if i live forever i can't know these things they don't exist on that level right and that's what's happening you're right that's what's happening in the toast and on a very practical

**P.Shchelin:**
level just so the way we think about time and space so we think that there is me you and the table maybe people behind the camera physically like on this system but what happens actually even here just more visible around the super there is you and everyone who ever met you all of the relationships which are behind you like both horizontally like people you've met but those kind of vertically in the back quote unquote in the time of all your parents grandparents that's why toasting to parents grand so much like it's like it's all of it like it's all personal it's like as you said it's space the universe because if i do the chain of all of the relationships you had in your life it will be universal especially when there are 25 people around the table just mathematically like it actually will be universal right but also it's kind of universally back like quote unquote but also the universally forward because children all of the future possibilities all of the future deaths so ultimately supra helps you to remember that we as a human and that's the paradox of our time experience we actually don't live in the past future what we live is against the face of eternity and what stays in the eternity is the only thing that stays in the eternity is the relationship it's it's the relationships you take you can't think

**J.Heers:**
you better take your relationship serious then you better take your relationship you're all right

**P.Shchelin:**
you'd better take them seriously like you'd better take all of this like grudges you hold

**J.Heers:**
around the table this is good you can't keep them but you can but it's it's scary it's dangerous

**P.Shchelin:**
well try for too long like

**J.Heers:**
the table will actually destroy you you're unlocking something because if there is a goal for the people i know in georgia who do this if there is a goal there's really not a goal that's not the right phrase if there is a hope if there's a hope it's that the table acquires svidoba and i think last night if i'm grading it we did it because if you notice people didn't want to leave yes the restaurant was closed for an hour and a half do you know people are still there and that svidoba that piece is the evidence

**P.Shchelin:**
of eternity right it's exactly an evidence and this oh sorry peace i have a complicated relationship with the world because actually in a like it's one of the most difficult words in that opinion in my opinion to translate svidoba is great but svidoba is not peace as you know in the same way like i understand yeah so let's try a little bit to unpack it because i think various harmful understanding of what we put in english in the word peace and even any modernized language that's understanding peace as an absence of struggle peace as an absence of conflict peace as an absence of pain so peace is safety well peace is not about safety like no svidoba is not about safety yes

**J.Heers:**
okay good so she by the way i would say that svidoba does have a nuanced meaning but keep

**P.Shchelin:**
going i want to hear this so so what i'm saying is like the svidoba or the true peace it's not about this safety it's about exactly the transcendence of vulnerability it's a transcendence and the openness which goes after like it's this like it's the wind after the fire i'm sorry i will use a biblical metaphor but it is this after the fire so it's not let's try to prevent any fire to rise and coming back to the wine conversation yeah so let's avoid wine so no fire rises because chaos like chaos can explode like any time and well it can the problem is if you want to achieve true peace or svidoba or the kingdom

**J.Heers:**
you need to go through the fire that's i think i'm hearing svidoba is the eclipse of shame yeah on some level yeah kind of you're outside of shame all of the hard things about you the the bad the quote bad things about are exposed in a way and you're still loved and you're still you're

**P.Shchelin:**
visible and you're letting certain things go but you're not letting certain things go by avoiding

**J.Heers:**
them that's what that's what i mean yes you eclipse shame but you don't get rid of the foibles the foibles are clear the reason i that you're now no longer shameful is because i see and i know you as as my brother and yet you have problems and that is your svidoba yes that's what i mean by svidoba i don't mean like peace between nations

**P.Shchelin:**
you know no but even on it works the same on a nation yeah it's the reason why it it's much more difficult to work between nations because we don't sit at the same table and it would be really hard to put everybody around the same table and expose vulnerabilities wouldn't

**J.Heers:**
it be great though of this i can dream let's go to russia and do supra you're a russian man come on hook me up i will i will do what i can let's do one with putin

**P.Shchelin:**
can i say can i say putin yeah you can you can still say this word it would be interesting experience because all of the people and you know you've met several powerful people but that's what they are trying to do for them peace is the result of risk management let's talk about it too because it surprisingly relates so back to tamada and why i'm saying the tamada is true example of power yes on the way it is about risk management but not in a modern way it's a way of risk management by love attention awareness like in the sense i see this wounded man and my risk management management is precisely an act of seeing i see his wound i give the toast that might challenge him but it's an act of seeing that's what i manage it and i'm open to see what by the way you're

**J.Heers:**
speaking about an actual toast called an aloe vera so aloe vera for the georgian tamada is a tool tools are bad word it's too um it's too utilitarian but aloe vera is a type of honor where the the the toast master the tamada offers a table to another person at the table and that person becomes the tamada and they have the let's just call it they have the audacity the ability the audacious ability to toast about any theme they'd like so if i was at the table and i said please uh pasha please take my aloe vera take my table you might take it for one or two toast you might take it for the rest of the night but i've given you the honor because and i've risked the entire culture of the table because you could literally start doing anything and when you do that um i'm responsible on some level for my choice and so i'm trying to and by the way why are these aloe vera is given this is really important you could say it's given to make the table better but usually what it's given is out of honor so for instance i know your family to have helped his family in the time when their house burned down so i want to give you the toast at the table because i know you're going to honor this person which i'm trying to honor and so i might be grumpy at this moment because his house just burned down and i'm watching the table and i see he's he's detached because he's sad and so i would say please take my table now i could give my table directly to the guy whose house burned down that's not a very nice thing to do on some level because i'm he's going to transmit his his sorrow and so i want you to honor him and that's why i gave you my table i wouldn't give you the table so you can make me look better that's possible but the real reason to give someone the table is so that they do the work on your behalf but they could screw it up the quote unquote

**P.Shchelin:**
the true risk management is openness to possibilities that's right but also open to this to pain possibilities of pain that's the truth quote unquote risk management the reason we brought it up the modern way of risk management is closing the possibilities that's right and also

**J.Heers:**
also also creating the proper management so that i might keep my power yes let's just be honest

**P.Shchelin:**
with that oh let's be honest no no no i'm i'm you know i'm still making it i'm not even going right right right let's imagine all of the intentions are pure as they can be like i'm saying that even in the best case scenario the logic of the best

**J.Heers:**
people is to close and this this is basically what christ refers to as the world yes effectively

**P.Shchelin:**
that's what it is the problem is uh movement like table is in a constant state of movement and that's the art and life is in a constant movement and i say it consciously so you just talk about that there is no time it's like that it happens in the face of eternity yeah but there's a still movement so that's the tricky part that's the tricky part there is no time truly but there is a lot of movement which contradicts our understanding of physics because you know

**J.Heers:**
movement time is like what it understands our current understanding of physics given our current let's call it this our current anthropology which lacks a god yes in that physics we can't understand movement and timelessness i agree but that's not how it's not how it works

**P.Shchelin:**
constantly keeps biting that's the reason why you know any that's the trick of modern modern quote unquote life and governance and like from very small level of a person to big levels of nation we think that's the only way to achieve safety which we take as synonym to schwedowa to peace which is right that's great is to effectively stop the time i'm sorry like that's what we want let's just make a border fixed this is the conservative inclination yes like all of us are effectively in that sense they're all even quote unquote progressives they also kind of want

**J.Heers:**
to freeze certain they want to freeze their values in time which is a type of heavenly moment for

**P.Shchelin:**
them yes that's true it's inescapable but the problem is i'm sorry you can't do it because you

**J.Heers:**
want to freeze it it keeps biting you is this also why soteriology for the orthodox is was saved m saved being saved yes you can't speak of it in one plane no as finished you can't stay in finished if you do you're doing disservice really to christ

**P.Shchelin:**
yes i think yeah it's not an act it's like it's a being in an act like and it's continuous constantly continuous being and that's a continuous movement and because movement continues it's never fixed movement is constant like any description of saints which give of heaven it's a movement it's a movement which is ironic which is ironic eternity yeah given a dirt

**J.Heers:**
given frozen eternity of the one i grew up with i got a question do you think we can do i i could do this all i love talking to you about yeah you're giving me such opportunity to share this thing that i love oh figure out what to take in and take out let's let's let's say there's a hundred things piled up about about the table okay a hundred i think we've been up in the 90s we're up in the heavenly realm but we pop down do you think the world will take this as a way to dine do do we need all the heavenly conversations okay i will tell you i i was listening because i want to share this as a way to eat that is universal and this is universal no as i said the language is georgians are like turning in their graves like really that really is no we should i think it's salvific by the way saint gabriel talks about it by no means

**P.Shchelin:**
we are like i would say that's the only way to eat like or it's like the mother of god or the mother of god must be like and we talked about it's like about the spirit and then tradition but if you're talking about eating as i said we need to remember that peace is not safety we need to remember that it's only in the face of death we can face eternity which is the true life and actually overcome this that we cannot stop the movement that the authority is about giving and being open while keeping the respect that the category of warner is the language to describe relationships it's a relationship come forward all of these things so so the table is to me it's a gateway it's exercise is honestly to an extent and it's simply a good place to be so i do hope we will see more of it but to your question do we need to talk about it my honest answer is unfortunately and here like for us as a modern man yes okay i think it's not a sign of our virtue it's another sign of our sickness and i'm open about it like basically are born in 1310 an english village we don't need to talk about it or like if we are born in like mountainous georgian village or like in siberian russian village or unlike west africa we don't need to talk about it and i will be up front like as a person who does it for living that's a better way doing it without knowing it is a way better way it's a way better way 100 hands down problem is as you said with the cigars we are already children of modernity to do something without out understanding something for a lot of people is much harder for for a lot of people the part of healing is understanding not just understanding cologne i will be upfront you can watch 10 100 times about supra dining categories live death transcendence until you start doing it it won't truly make sense to you yeah you can push it way too far but i do think that there is a merit in talking about it again not for the old world people for them it's weird form of entertainment maybe crazy weird guys that is true one of my to speak to that one

**J.Heers:**
of my favorite things so practically and tactically what first things is a part of now in america the project is supra sharing it teaching it being it throwing parties we're going to do a big thing this year i'm working on i need help though i need help uh supra around the world where you are on this date we're going to set it probably in september you bring people into your into your house whether you've been automata or not and we give you the materials and all of us do it on this one friday or saturday night together and we do it as as like a unit high offer yeah high offering and then it goes sideways in half the houses and then in half the houses people can't believe how cool it is and then all of us share it together and and it's for our work and obviously we want to benefit from it but this has become our project and so tactically strategically we're trying to get it to as many tables as possible because it it's beautiful and i think it's a type of healing it's it's a type of project remember beautiful i think it's a

**P.Shchelin:**
beautiful remembering yes and as i said yes it's a beautiful remembering i think you and i can be aware like it's good to be aware that like it's uh like it's a it's a it's a it's a it's a it's a it's a good fruit of but of a sickness and you can be aware of both yes what we found is people

**J.Heers:**
take it and run with it it's beautiful but i'd say this going back to the tactics um what i find is is the rare person let's call them philosophically inclined let's just call them that there's there's not that many people but out of 10 there's two or three they also in our world have tended to become leaders in our world they also in our world have tended to become leaders in communities and they're also even though i don't really like to admit this you know the peter thiel types are out there doing all kinds of philosophy but what they're really doing is instantiating all these like micro systems let's just be honest those cats like to hear explanations there's a certain group of people in the united states that like to hear the philosophical underpinnings of any particular activity but what i'm finding at the tables is there's a majority of people that like to hear the philosophical underpinnings of any particular activity but what i'm finding at the tables is there's a majority of people that just want to experience it yeah and when we talk about it i think we're speaking to one type of person and when we're just trying to do it in every corner we're speaking to another type of person you need both you need both and whenever people are always saying and i hear this all the time about all these friends i've made you right pageau uh father peter all these cats they're like i'm sick of these internet preacher types i'm kind of like i totally get it totally get it six out of ten people should be totally sick of those people but there's these other four people that needed that is like their bread and butter we do live in a reason centric world that's my point and you better show some rationality as per why you're doing what you're

**P.Shchelin:**
doing but since you're doing it better you're not showing you at least you like you don't show rationality like that that's a bad word to describe it like okay yeah i get that you're actually showing that there are things which are bigger than reason that's right which are above the reason but they make sense i think there is a big difference between making sense of something and thinking rationally about something because

**J.Heers:**
rationally doesn't make sense that's why there's so many converts rushing into orthodoxy is because they're not they don't get rid of their reason the thing that they're pursuing makes sense but you're like how does it make sense it makes sense out of the outside of the paradigm of the atheistic scientist but it still makes sense it still makes sense it like transcends the atheistic worldview in a

**P.Shchelin:**
rational way okay so you can say that there is rationality to it but it's not about rationality

**J.Heers:**
that's what it is so well i'd say it like this the academy doesn't own rationality they haven't patented it okay they want to patent it because they want you to think in that let's call it

**P.Shchelin:**
materialistic way okay yeah but not okay you see you're kind of finding it but even on the other hand on a bigger level i think like basically logos is not rationality all i'm saying i guess and that's why that's that's fair my my nerd nerdiness so that's why i like i see that i see that rationality is kind of now we have a context you can say uh it's devoid of personality and that's the key problem like not devoid of we can say bigger relationship

**J.Heers:**
that's the whole reason it lacks a totality a whole it lacks a fullness

**P.Shchelin:**
obviously like it's deliberate it lacks a fullness because the whole reason we became rational like it's not just even atheistics it's like we're like 400 years not only at least and like even before the whole idea of like the biggest appeal is that there is no person in a two two times two two plus two is four there is no person in it so that's the embodiment of rationality devoidance avoidance of a relationship the problem is that the truth is expressed only through relationship so the logos is related to the truth the truth is expressed only through relationship so the logos is there is a relationship there is will there is like there is love like but it is full of relationship and is it rational no it's above rational that i think rationality makes sense only in the context of this relationship that's an interesting part i think that's another and as you can see it as a sign of tragedy or the sign of a mortal time like imagine a rational tamada just imagine a thomas jefferson created this this thing you're

**J.Heers:**
about seriously yeah yeah they called it the jeffersonian table oh my goodness i didn't know he didn't know he was doing super but they created a table in the white house he practiced it and they took topics and then they got their guests and then the topics were disseminated by jefferson or whoever was the head and then they took turns trying to answer the question and toasting as they went yeah it was a whole tradition it was a whole movement and the whole idea was to figure out what was what they wanted and so i think we came from a very different and fix a problem.
Oh my goodness.
They did it.
