
**SPK_0:**
Hello, everyone.
Today, I have a wonderful guest, Jonathan Pichot, for the second time on my channel, which makes me incredibly privileged and happy.
Thank you, Jonathan, for your time.
You're sincerely welcomed.

**SPK_1:**
No, it's great to see you again, Pavel.

**SPK_0:**
So, what I want to explore today is, in effect, a continuation of our previous conversation, because there are many topics and themes raised back then, like I think it was in May, but there is still much more to explore.
I will put in the link to this video an article, which I published on a symbolic world, which will be referenced quite often, I think, or at least I hope so.
I have no time during covers today.
So, let's get into the conversation, and so for everyone who wants, please take a look.
So, but my first question will be more general.
I noticed that, generally speaking, you tend to avoid talking about, let's say, political phenomenons in most of your conversations, videos, projects.
There are some very huge, notable exceptions, like your ARC paper, which I suppose you have published.
I still recommend reading, because it was very interesting content for you to a little bit step into the field, but can I ask you a more broad question first?
Could it be that you might think that nowadays we kind of live in a time where political language is simultaneously an opposition to symbolic language and theological language, but also is used as a substitution to it?

**SPK_1:**
Mm-hmm.
Well, I think that my...
My hesitation to talk about politics is mostly because I don't believe that the solution to our problem lies there, and so that's one.
The second one is also because the political in the normal world is something which should be very close to you, right?
It's the life of the polis.
It's the life of the city in which you live, and it's...
And it's...
It should be understood as a place where your activity can make a difference, you know, and can be part of the process of people getting along or not getting along or whatever.
And I think that one of the things that's happened, you know, let's say in the 20th century, since World War II, it's accelerating more and more, is the pervasiveness of political discourse on a global scale.
And I think that one of the things that's happened, you know, let's say in the 20th century, since World War II, it's accelerating more and more, is the pervasiveness of political discourse on a global scale.
Which is that now we have this situation where we basically are pulled into discussions about what's happening everywhere in the world.
And that is happening both in terms of media, but it's also happening in the West because of immigration.
You know, it's like you go to downtown Montreal.
I went to downtown Montreal a few weeks ago, and there's this huge demonstration of Venezuelans that are demonstrating about Venezuela in Montreal.
And we know...
We know now that there are constant demonstrations about Palestine everywhere in the rest of the world.
And so one of the things that the kind of globalism has done is that it's made politics everywhere, everywhere, right?
And that is, to me, that is destructive.
It's destructive personally to the person to think that they are always concerned about everything that happens everywhere in the world.
That is destructive to the person.
But I also think it's destructive...
It's destructive to the actual polis, which is the actual participation in your everyday life.
So, you know, we have this idea.
And I suffer from the same problem, which is that the real stakes are here at the national level.
You know, Trump versus Harris.
That's what really matters.
But get involved in my own town, in my own community, in my own...
Yeah, that's boring.
Like, that doesn't make a difference, right?
So I think that this is one of the reasons why I don't talk.
Especially about international politics very much.
Like you said, there are some notable exceptions.
The ARC paper was there mostly because I think that it was there to introduce a different way of thinking about politics, a different way of thinking about identity, which I think is a better solution to the culture war and all the madness that you see of people getting sucked into every little nonsense and, you know, all the political commentators.
Because I kind of follow some of them and I can watch them just, you know, it's just hook, bite, and then you go in.
There are bigger questions to ask, like even in terms of politics.
Sorry, I'm going so long on this, but I think it's important to say at the outset, you know, is also one of the things people don't ask enough is why am I asked to care about this particular thing right now that has nothing to do with me?
You know, what are the forces which are making me care about this conflict?
And I don't even know that this conflict exists.
Like Somalia is being bombed every day.
I don't even, I never heard about it.
I don't know about that.
What, really Somalia is being bombed every day?
Yeah, Somalia is being bombed every day and it's been happening for years.
And this is the situation where you have these weird things where conflicts all of a sudden become salient artificially, I think, for certain reasons and others have just ignored and it's on the international scale.
You could say, you know, on the local scale, you know why certain things become salient.
It's because they're relevant to my life.
You know, if the town here decides to put a highway over my house, then I'm going to care about that and I'm going to get involved in the polis and involved in the politics and go to the meetings and fight for my participation in this city.
So all of these are the things that people, I think, have to remember, you know, constantly, which is that I'm Canadian, I'm not American.
I am not going to get involved in American politics or at least very little because it's just not my country.

**SPK_0:**
I think you raised several important questions in your answer, which is always a great mark.
Basically, and it kind of comes to the problem, which I think the key issue is that the language of political, you're absolutely right when you were describing these problems, which comes up too much.
I mean, I don't mind when even we raise the question of politics or community in modern day language, it's like politics must be something big, something fleshy, something from the outside.
But don't you think that one of the main reasons for it is pretty fundamental, that our very basic understanding of exactly what community is, what the polis is, is simply off the mark and it's been off the mark, let's say, not for like today or yesterday, but for, I would argue, at least 100 years.
And I think the way to help people to understand what I mean by this is to highlight the link between community and community.
And I think that's where the language of symbolism can come into play.
Like, I don't know if you thought about it, but basically it would be interesting to hear your opinion, because I think it's very on the surface if you start thinking about it.
But at the same time, it has a very huge implications that if you think that community is not just a contract, like it's connected with a bigger reality.
What do you think?

**SPK_1:**
Do you agree with it?
No, I completely agree.
You know, by the way, for people who haven't read the article, I'm sure you're going to link to it.
It's a great article because it goes into, you know, some things that I talk about, you know, but it does it, you know, quoting Hobbes directly and talking, you know, using examples directly in the Enlightenment of how there's a transformation that's being brought about in terms of this notion, like you said, of something like the fact that we are these individuals that are free-floating and that we need to create a kind of illusion of unity in order to tamper our passions and tamper the wildness of the individual.
And that creates this serious problem, which is definitely the one that we're in now.
And so it's possible even to think, you don't necessarily, to address that directly in your article, which is that the end point of thinking that, right, that we have these kind of artificial constructs that we create in order to tamper us and to, you know, that the end of that is to say, well, couldn't we just have one for all people?
Like, couldn't we just have one, right?
Couldn't we just have a global state?
Because anyways, it's all a kind of artificial construct anyways.
It doesn't really matter, you know, and if we could do that, then we could just have one state and then a bunch of it, free-floating individuals, and that would be a kind of ideal of the vision, you know.

**SPK_0:**
Well, since you mentioned it, I think basically what we are dealing with, and that's why I'm a little bit, one can say, even pushing you with my question, we're in a state where we, I think, actually need the language of symbolism and the language of even religious philosophy to talk about the most fundamental political things because it's all related to these processes.
As you like to say, they are playing out, like, you cannot understand the drive for this global unification.
You cannot understand the drive for this creation of universal Tower, or Tower of Babel, on let's say this, like, actually, I think it's happening right now, there is happening, like a big UN summit, with something to together for the future, where effectively, discussing, again, another version of the world government, that's already like with global censorship, with global control over resources.
all the things like and it's very easy to let's say brush it out as madness or exactly to talk about is let's say just for example like people like to do in a classical political analysis which you find so annoying that oh this is this power group and this one this and this one this and that is the secret plan for them to make more money out of this and you are missing the most important thing i think which is the actual first found the statement of political theology because what political theology actually says that all political processes are theological and theological processes in nature this in the same manner as let's say human life is theological and theological and like if we go into this then actually on the one hand everything becomes clear what is happening even in political reality but at the same time it becomes very difficult to talk to people who are not familiar with the language because such language become confronting to counterintuitive at the same time i would argue it is the only language we can which can actually explain why and what is happening and coming back to what i was writing and it's kind of my back question to you whether you support this idea or not that effectively for the last 400 years all let's say the key symbolic conflict like it's that's how symbolism is comes into play and i want maybe first for you to explain uh to other people the difference between symbolic and virtual i think that's one of the very key understanding to understand the difference between in the nature of political processes let's say pre-enlightenment pre-modernity and post-light and post-modernity so if you can help

**SPK_1:**
um i mean i'm not sure i completely understand your question i don't know i'm not sure how it is you want me to you know because i i i think that i would i'm right to say we are not we are

**SPK_0:**
want to be careful you know i think okay i will i will rephrase basically uh people let's say why symbol is not an illusion why symbol is more than but by symbol is more than just an illusion

**SPK_1:**
yeah well yeah i mean i i think that like because you can a way to understand it is to understand it kind of fractally right as the person and the the fact that humans have multiplicity in them we have different ideas and hobbes is right about that right but what he's wrong about and what he doesn't seem at least in my perception to understand is that those those multiple desires are resolved they're resolved in the person and they should be to some extent resolved in the person because that's the vector of unity of those of those desires but once you start to think that in some ways they're out of control you know that there's this out of control desires in you and all you are is an unconscious stream of desire not that you're not that because we are that to some extent then exactly this weird uh idea that the that the communion between us is not something which which is which is real because he doesn't seem to see it at the level of the person already right and so it's it's these artificial constructs that are there whereas just as you can know that as a person sometimes you get pulled in different directions you can feel it inside you everybody feels it but you can also act with you unitary purpose and unitary direction.
And you can also experience that in you.
And in the same way, humans are made to create or to participate in those bodies as persons with each other.
And so the communion of love that you talk about in your article, which is really the true way in which people can bond together towards higher bodies, is already something that happens inside you.
And to imagine these free-floating particles, right, that they're not by their own multiplicity called to join into unity by that very fact, and that there is such a thing as only multiplicity, that type of intuition is wrong.
And it creates the problem that we talk about, which is in some ways to understand the state of the universe.
The state as an artificial constraint that is top-down on free-floating particles, whereas that is not how it happens in you.
That's not how it happens in anything.
And it's also not how it happens in people.
It's weird how people, even the way that people think about the past, because we're so ruined by media and movies and stories, it's like a 15th century peasant.
Love the king.
I know that.
I know you don't like that.
I know people don't like that.

**SPK_0:**
I like it.

**SPK_1:**
Most people don't like that because they think that, no, it's always just oppression.
It's always like, no, the 15th century peasant loved his king.
And the 15th century peasant would excuse the king constantly, even sometimes wrongly, would say, oh, the reason why the king is doing this is because he doesn't know.
He doesn't know that there are people around.
You know, like this is...
This is...
And you think that this is, but this is totally natural.
Like this is a natural way because we exist in this body and we have to live in this body.
And therefore, to imagine always our leaders as duplicitous and false and as power hungry only as that is to destroy the very communion in which we live.
And so the way in which, let's say, normal ancient societies function was usually like that.
So once in a while, there could be obviously a horrible leader and that can happen quite often, even be realistic, even realistic, quite often.
Exactly.
But even if that happened, like you could be caught, like you could be caught by lower forms of this.
Right.
Like, let's say you get a really horrible king.
But then at the level of.
A lower level, which is, you know, my my town, my city, my parish, my community, then you can get you can be caught by that.
Right.
Whereas in this vision of the free floating passions of the person, you know, it's all it's just it's illusion and tyranny all the way, all the way through, you know.

**SPK_0:**
But go on.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, but I think that's what you were you were referring to, which is that this idea that power structure, that what we consider power structures are just.
Artificial and are not actually natural to the the the binding of people together.

**SPK_0:**
Well, I was actually referring even to slightly, I would say, more general problem, like which is.
What I think underlies sexual the hopes and world, you know, maybe hopes per se, but what we developed after it, let's say the enlightenment project is even a bigger philosophical debate about what is real.
I will bring it to it.
Like because.
Because let's say if you consider that the only real thing is something which is quantifiable and something which is material, then automatically it leaves you with a way fewer options for the way you see your society and the failures of your society.
You mentioned that, for example, peasants love the king and like they even were very tolerant to human mistake.
Well, one of the reasons, because they were understanding that it is human.
Like, I know very well, you mean like in the folk stories and even like ethnography, like even in the 19th century Russia, basically the often peasants attitude towards, let's say, Tsar was pity, like they were pitting him because it's such a heavy, effective job to carry.
It's such a heavy cross to bear, like it was understood as a cross and in a sense it is true, but if you consider that the old reality is a mechanism that everything can be arranged rationally.
So.
Everything can be, let's say, created perfectly to minimize the failures, then you create, you end up in this vicious cycle, vicious pattern, and you lose the most important thing of what the communion is, even while you are still doing it.
I think that's the key problem.
The key problem.

**SPK_1:**
Reduce communion to bureaucracy.
Like exactly.
That's exactly what we saw in the modern state, which is the reality of people living together and having to negotiate and to share and to.
To have conflicts and all of that, you know, and that out of that, you need obviously to have certain people that are legislators, that are rulers or whatever, but to transform that into a machine, like you said, a bureaucracy of management, you know, of management of statistics of people, you know, it leads to, I mean, yeah, it leads to what we have.

**SPK_0:**
However, like, I think it's not even that it's important to understand now, but it's only a first step.
And that's what I think.
However, I try to convey and maybe have future conversations to go into deeper, because I think it's not only tier one illusion.
Like the truth is that despite that, that's what we think the community and politics is, we act in a completely different reality.
And what I mean is like I say, we can change the basic principles of any of the functions of an annuity.
And for this, I'm very grateful for your question.
Like basically what I'm saying, regardless of whether we.
Think that a political community is a church, it is still a church.
You might not think it is.
You might pretend it's a rational agreement.
You might pretend that it is like something we, like rational beings signed up here, but it still functions according to the laws of political theological reality.
It's still functions as a effective church.
It still is united by the same sacred center and it is exactly sacred.
And the very simple answer to it.
Like how to prove it.
Let's say to demonstrate is the attitude.
You don't treat it rationally.
You treat it something as a holy in case of America, for example, the Declaration of Independence.
It's not just a paper.
It's the same as the Covenant.
It's the same as the Ark of Covenant, and it functions in the same way, but we don't have the language to talk about it in the same way.
And that's a huge gray zone where many different tricks are happening.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, but it's but you can still you could also kind of see it.
It has a as a progressive erosion, though, of that, of that way of functioning, which is that, you know.
And it's manifested in the breakdown, let's say in the spreading out of the let's say of the suburbs.
I always use that example as a good example because, you know, my suburb has no identity.
Like, no one cares about it.
It has no center.
It has no, you know, you barely know who the mayor is.
Doesn't really matter.
Because they're all being managed by the state anyways.
And that's where they get most of the funds seem to come from there more than even from the from the taxes.
And so there's this like weird, top down thing that happens even in terms of our communities.
You know, and so then it gets projected higher up.
You know, America is a good example of one that's holding to some extent.
But in Canada, we, you know, Trudeau said, we're a post national nation, we're, we're a nation of openness, like our only value is inclusion.
And so it's like, it's, it's, you know, and it's very dangerous to the existence of the of the of the, it's a very dangerous to the cohesion of our, of our society, right, to move in that direction.
Because you're right that you we need those we need, we need some kind of center to recognize who we are and how we participate.
But as we kind of deconstruct them, you know, possibly the purpose is, again, to put them higher, right?
Like you

**SPK_0:**
put them higher, but I think it's basically, sorry, maybe I'm didn't convince this idea correctly.
I think even need is not problematic.
It's not just the fact that we need the centers, it's the fact that we end up having them, no matter what we think, no matter what we think it is, and in case of the, you brought the idea, for example, of inclusion.
Basically, as you well know, the human nature and the human creativity is very talented at creating idols out of literally anything.
So inclusion can become the idol around which you're trying to center your community.
But you think about it as just, let's say, a neutral value.
or as a sort of a rational thought processes you don't interact with it as with idle but

**SPK_1:**
inclusion is literally like etymologically inclusion is a diabolical center because it it it is division like you can't make multiplicity the center like that's not possible that is how you destroy something is to say i'm gonna make the purpose of my car inclusion what you're gonna make the purpose of your car inclusion so it's like i'm gonna start like putting branches on it and like just adding stuff to it because i don't know what the purpose of it except for it to be inclusion that's nothing can function that way it's like a it is it is a it is a destructive it is a destructive gesture but there is something obviously unconsciously there are probably there are still things that rise them that act as these weird even that like it acts as a illusion of a weird even that like it acts as a illusion ofений yeah

**SPK_0:**
there are things we the same uh happening here

**SPK_1:**
yeah what can we do to make sure it's helpful that make sure it's は so

**SPK_0:**
just let's take a second look at this um so what can we do to make sure you don't get it uh quickly uh the trick is that we act let's say as if so what's the project of modernity and what is the project of enlightenment like is that what you put in your theological and teleological foundation the logos of a community and every community is structured around a logos like as you well know so it reflects the logos and it's moving towards the logos simultaneously and in this movement it becomes a community and the idea of enlightenment the idea of modernity the idea of hopes out of fear as we discussed because humans cannot be trusted basically so we don't put a real logos let's say what i mean by real logos if you talk to let's say an ancient tribe and you say that they have their animal totem or their ancestor totem they act to it as real even zeus is real for an ancient greek it's not a zeus is not an illusion as a mammoth head on a stick it's not an illusion it's a real so and the people are united about this thing as it's a real thing it's an invisible thing but it's a real thing the idea of modernity is like we are above this where it's a simple story it's about it's a it's a dumb folk story tale so we're putting a illusion a simulacrum a constant a whole and etc etc etc which i call virtual like that's what i kind of mean so it's virtual in the sense that we created it and we understand that it is an illusion we know that it is an illusion but we expect it to act as if it's a real and that's why our understanding of this process is effectively wrong and we are constantly surprised why it's not working like it's it's effectively a world which has cut itself from the heaven it's a world that deliberately cut itself from the heaven and creates a simulacrum over heaven on the lower level and all political projects of the last 400 years are this like all

**SPK_1:**
of them are just different variations of this yeah yeah i mean i i agree that the and it's you know it's one version of the existentialist nonsense right this idea that sisyphus would just continue to roll his rock up the hill even though he knows that it's going to come back down and he knows that there's nothing up there right that will bind him to to a purpose uh you know that's not uh that's not how can i say this like you you actually it it it runs out right it it runs out

**SPK_0:**
it runs out yeah and it has to speed up and of course and of course it's like basically a metaphor and i think this can be used as effectively as a drug trip it constantly needs more and it reminds that's why these projects are becoming shorter with each with each iteration if you notice that the new big flash idea but at the same time that's why you can maybe never thought about it but i think that's actually the reason why let's say all and that's what i think is not this is it's partially what is gnosticism is uh this like creation of this like virtual realities and like political gnosticism it's like we know the secret let's say knowledge of ideal of illusion of dialectics and we move it forward etc etc but that's why it's so important for us to control the speech because those who control the speech those who control the discourse they control is an illusion and it is very ironic because we expect that we will seriously discuss and read something which is we understand which is which doesn't really exist as if it is the most important and as if it's the most like acting in our life as this inclusion is just the biggest let's say the most uh visible example on you know on the modern level but it was before let's say class let's treat class as the most important oh let's treat race as the most important thing and it's it's going on it's going on but at the same time it's only on the surface level uh at least that's what i think is driving

**SPK_1:**
this because this is i guess that's a good question right to say you know because one of the things you see in in your article and you describe i think very well is in some ways when you talk about game of thrones in the article you all actually represent a character i haven't watched game of thrones but one of the characters basically knows that this is an illusion they know that this whole thing is a

**SPK_0:**
charade but they do it nonetheless uh i would say two two answers one is uh simple another is more exactly theological simple answer is the uh is this exactly philosophical the fear uh they are the we need to understand that the foundation of all political processes of modernity is fear and hope starts with fear because that's why it's so important to understand the time where he's coming from he's coming from a time of religious wars that's a very uncomfortable truth about human nature that when you believe in something with your whole heart it can lead to a lot of violence the notion of martyr is the same as the witness effectively to witness an idea is to be ready to die for an idea let's say or to die in the pursuit of an idea and it can lead to a very massive things let's say 100 years of religious war in europe not good so basically what i think it's partially started out of good intention and the good intention went well if climbing towards the heaven is so painful and there is so much blood in the process let's just subdued this thing we are afraid of it we are afraid of human nature when generally we are afraid of human nature because the king can be tyrannical the father can be oppressive the mother can strangle its baby etc etc etc at the same time the political structure can result in the genius side we are afraid of it so let's substitute it with something we think we can control so we cannot control a human card but we think we can control an institution that's what i think is one half of the answer and that's kind

**SPK_1:**
of say good intention at least half of the answer and so but so safety would be your safety so how would you describe what you're saying and how do you see that we need to preserve ourself like

**SPK_0:**
just yeah the comfort let's say that's why it develops into what would say sergey bulgakov it's one of the russian philosophers of the early 20th century cause it's armor lotsi the love for a place so the love so let's cut let's close the heaven for ourselves let's focus on what is below and let's try to make it as nice as comfortable as safe as controllable as we possibly can like that the good intention is but the uncomfortable truth and that's what i think people don't understand even when they're involved in these processes that what is really happening is uh even a bigger trick and to understand it i think you need to go a little bit to the art i know you're one of your favorite bands is dirt poor robbins and do you do you remember like their enchanted song they have this quote like and if we cannot raise the dead we're gonna raise hell instead yeah yeah no but i think that's if you answer what is happening so that's it's happening because not only visible things are real in political reality basically this logos around which the political community united and that's why i brought the example of a tribe they are not just ideas that are embodied ideas let's say their principalities their demons their angels and they are acting as well and that's what i think is honestly what is playing out so thinking that you control the solution that was that's why this image of pollen is so important so you think you are trying to create safety you think you are trying to create this mechanism but what in fact you are becoming the vessel for the spirits you can't even okay i understand yeah

**SPK_1:**
so basically what you're saying what you seem to be to be suggesting is that in the desire to be safe and secure and you know in control and and you know uh to protect ourselves which makes sense in this desire to cover ourselves to protect ourselves then we become the vehicle for forces that uh that we don't even maybe even know we like we we we you know because there are other agencies acting on us like there are other patterns playing through us and then people don't even realize what's going on and that is that what you meant when you said the return of

**SPK_0:**
yes yes yes that's what i meant by the return of the pagan gods uh or demons etc because we lost that's what i like about let's say medieval political language they in their worldview they do have place for this and they understand that different forces can be played they for example can say something well we sinned that's why this calamity has fallen upon us like it's not a ridiculous phrase to say and it is a very smart uh things to say because ultimately a community is what it remembers and one can say it's a community is a reflection of an idol or a god of a principality and it's a reflection of a god of a principality and it's a reflection of a god of a principality and it's a reflection of a god of a principality or a logos it is oriented towards or it's prayed towards but we lost this language in a pursuit of safety because the pursuit of this higher original the pursuit of the higher purpose is kind of false problem of uh waiting for the second it's kind of connected with the millennia reason if you go deep into the medieval history basically long story short I think people got tired of waiting for the second coming they tried to build it on with its own hands in a process they created a lot of mess like in the 16th century Europe it's really a lot of mess and they started to desire safety but the problem is it's not just we who are in place the principle basically principalities have agency ultimately and I don't I know I don't need to persuade you in this but uh like it is what is playing out uh uh in a political process but the modern political sense simply cannot talk about it nevertheless it is what is happening that's why it becomes very ironic as in the sense in that sense as the tribe is smarter than more than let's say uh president because tribe knows that when it prays to the God of its tribe it treats it as a God whereas when modern president talks about diversity equity inclusion or the Green New Deal they don't know that they are praying but they are and that's what I think the ultimate difference like if you want to put this way yeah yeah yeah

**SPK_1:**
yeah and I'm trying to see the mechanism that you're describing I mean I kind of see it it's still not totally clear to me but let's let's play out it let's give it let's give an example let me let me try to play out an example tell me what you think and so the easiest one is greed for example like money would be an easy one uh which is that people say oh well we need to be comfortable we need to be safe like we want to to basically make this right uh and in order to do that without knowing it they unleash let's say a an action in the world of of uh an accelerate let's say economy in a way that you see happening and this kind of desire to accumulate money and to accumulate goods and to do all that and that becomes its own thing that now nobody can control like nobody who who knows what the market is like nobody knows what the market is nobody nobody knows what the stock market is what these we are completely subservient to it and then someone announces on the on the news well the stock market crashed today and now all these consequences people like lose their houses people will all these things are going to happen because the stock market crashed and nobody knows what the causalities are we're completely subservient to this thing that nobody can control nobody can understand yeah even in

**SPK_0:**
this example it can be even more put even more direct terms let's say so we said that the increasing of human well-being is our is the ultimate purpose of a state for example that's the price which is often heard so let's say the material well-being well and for this material well-being we sacrifice literally we bring sacrifices like literal sacrifices we sacrifice time we sacrifice future we sacrifice kids quite literally let's say we sacrifice communities Etc Etc Etc and we expect like whether we admit it or not that as a result of these sacrifices we will receive this gold increase of GDP increase of this Etc Etc Etc and the fun thing is that we treat that we can talk about this in we are doing the things we can talk about what we are doing because think we are just following the numbers that's what I mean so and it but it is a very multi-tier like we can talk about quite easily right now because obviously you've been working on symbolism for so long but if you know if you try to explain this pattern even though it's quite visible and it's not really hard to explain that when you're you're literally bringing sacrifices for the God of comfort you're literally doing it like it looks but you don't understand that you are doing it you think you are doing just what a human economical should do for example or what irrational things should do and that's that's what I mean and it's happening on all different like levels basically I think it's an escapable thing that's what I think the most humbling to get for many people because exactly this desire to control this desire for safety we wanted to create our own God like effective what lepiphan is what I'm sorry what let's say even an American Declaration of Independence this creator who endowed with certain inalienable rights he's kind of also not there he's not present okay he's in doubt and then he's gone so it's still kind of we are in control of these things but the truth is that these things you can never be in control of them truly and and that's the main part and that's what I think the bridge of this that's what I'm trying to achieve and hopeful to work on this discipline exactly to bring uh to bring the bridge between these two languages it can in a similar manner that you but do but slightly but in the different aspect because because there is a very uncomfortable truth I don't know if you noticed it on like um I don't know have you ever watched like horror movies like recently or something like this not recent I've watched more movies when I was younger but

**SPK_1:**
I don't think I don't remember the last movie I watched okay it's just there's a very interesting

**SPK_0:**
pattern falling there right now is that effectively the heavens are closed but the hell is right here and that's what I think is the ultimate uh like the demons the supernatural the evil entities they're all there like and there is a conflict of a rational mind with all of these entities that cannot get it like there's like psychiatrist tries to understand whether it's schizophrenia or not schizophrenia but uh in a way it is a similar pattern what is happening in our understanding of political realities uh because after we closed heavens like as a metaphor and tried to focus on what is imminent we could not stay there yeah I mean if you cannot but we made open from the things below and we cannot escape but becoming a vessels on an individual and

**SPK_1:**
collective levels that's what yeah yeah no I mean that's totally right that I mean the renegade don't talked about this long time ago in Reign of quantity he talks about he says he calls it fissures in the Great Wall you know he has he says that the the the from the Enlightenment and the scientific moment you know we have this idea that we we close ourselves off from anything any spiritual influence and the truth is that we did to some extent and it worked and that's why that's why there are no miracles that's why a lot of people you know they don't necessarily they can't kind of see they don't understand when they read medieval text they don't even know what it's talking about because it's like it's it's referring to some other reality that we even don't have access to but like you said the cracks are have been appearing now since at least World War II I would say from World War II on and the the fishes in the wall are just spreading and spreading the I had never thought about the idea of that horror movies are in some way it plays out in the story of the horror movie which is exactly what you said which is the story of the horror movie is the rational being against the demons how can I believe in these things this is impossible it's still happening even though I think it's not possible all of these things and there's no appeal to God you know in the uh in the heaven is closed that's kind of this is the

**SPK_0:**
main feeling we have the end but this is but it's necessary close because we have all the we forgot most basic political political theological truth and just to demonstrate because if you don't mind like if you have a little bit time I just want to demonstrate on couple images like what I mean that the ultimate reality basically the basic thesis is like whether you like it or not what actually calls Community together is a religion is a covenant and covenant is a religious by nature and to show you the images and then the question becomes what holds the covenant and actually there are a lot of imagery like which uh quite well in the shows that even though we don't know this our ancestors did it like here is for example a sculpture like of an icon can you see well yeah yeah yeah I know that that type but if you notice it's very interesting idea so that's the same Nicholas of mojais like it's a like it's a sculpt originally sculpture as a result of an icon version and what is interesting here is that he holds the city like it's literally written right here it's a city of mojais let's let's say so but that's a very visible reflection of what uh the nature of political Community is like it's not just about church like in any political Community that is there is this religious element and the Saint holds like the city the principality holds the city or if you want to go let's say uh basically the derivative from from it would be a phrase an idea holds the city but that I think is very clear it was kind of tried to bring this like to pretend to be scientific and not still going to the crux of it because then the reasonable question was an idea whose idea is holding how it's false etc etc etc whereas like you can see in this imagery that like it's pretty clear that the principality the logos was holding the unity together and once you remove this once once you stop this idea of a city which is you see is the border so there is a border there is a unity within the border and it's but it's not holding itself by itself it's effectively still hold by something external and you can see it's an imagery the ultimate imagery of it I would say is a very interesting idea like you know that uh the image of pantocrator like the the Christ which holds things together well in uh there is a story which I cannot actually show you the image because it was destroyed in World War II but there was a story in the city of Novgorod like big on the most ancient Russian citizens they were priests were painting this image on the tallest part of the cathedral and no matter how hard they try to do instead of a blessing gesture the hand of the Lord was always kind of in a holding position it was like as if it holds things like and according to the legend that there was after like four attempts there was a voice from above that stopped doing it I am holding this city like and if you open my hands then exactly the city will disappear like another example is like this image of um from like uspania cathedrals that let's see it's a hand that holds exactly people the people it's the hands that hold the people and in a way the trick of modernity was to imagine we don't need this hand that we can create our own fans of all this hand but what happened is the result well we are still being called but first not by this hand by other hands but the hands we can't control we think we control but are in fact controlling us and I think it's uh like very important to start talking about these processes on this level because otherwise as you said in your very opening statement there is no interest in talking about them at all like there is no interest in talking about he said what you said what like what is happening this flashes and happens there this happens there like I don't know if you know no I think you're right you know and there there are

**SPK_1:**
many other images we could have used the the image of the veil protective veil of the mother of God you see that in the western medieval age middle age you see also images of the mother of God with like in her cloak she has all these people kind of like the hand uh you know this idea that we are held together uh you know it makes sense and like you said if we if we don't know what it's what didn't light and if we don't know what it's hear to know if we want to say hello it's that if we're doing this it ain't it's useful you sure if you know everybody's ways and Braille but if you like so many of us mean that's new how was etiquette holding us and what is driving us then it's going to be it's going to be forces that we don't we

**SPK_0:**
don't even understand like it's an example of what you are talking about like that's what you were talking about let's say the mother of god like and exactly you see the multiplicities different multiplicities it's a relatively new russian icon but it's based on all of these different different versions of mother of god from different let's say localities there is an image of a land but it is united with what like let's say covers it and basically yeah and i think we like this kind of comes to us as like symbolist or i'll say even orthodox like basically my big discovery in like first so i started let's say studying politics as a just traditional political scientist etc etc and rusev told i eventually found that this is just simply useless in in many ways it's not answering the real questions which not showing what's happening and then i discovered like basically this more traditional and then symbolic way of understanding the very same processes but then we have bigger days right now which we are in a very interesting position this these two things kind of exist in separate realities we don't really you know connect them and i think and that's why my question the first question was like whether uh you not want to do like where comes this desire not to connect like because we we want to separate us from this realities in a way like we want to separate us from this conversation but i think it's inevitable first that it's impossible because we're still living within these communities yeah and secondly if like basically if you don't provide an accurate account of something an accurate account will be provided i don't know like if you don't it's the same the problem of a culture war which you fight so much if you don't participate in a culture the culture will affect you in a way that will affect you in a way that will affect you in a way that will affect

**SPK_1:**
you yeah well that's i mean i think that that's the way to to i think that's the best way to understand it uh is is to how can i say this right it's to help rebuild the real communities that seems to be the only thing we can do and that starts with yourself and it starts with your own surrounding it starts with your own vices and your own sins and uh and then it starts with you know your family uh like i said your parish the things that are around you to me that is in some ways the only way to go because the the problem i mean i'm not saying you shouldn't be involved in the politics of your country when it was covid i was making a lot more noise about politics because it was in my house and in my life and it was my leaders and it was my country and it wasn't like donald trump and harris or it wasn't a war in the middle east or wasn't a war in eastern europe it was something that was happening here and so i was far more vocal and not only vocal but organized on the street level right it's like i did go to the protest i did i i also we had our own we reorganized our own network of associations in order to be able to to thrive through the the crisis and so i'm not against i'm not against politics i'm just i think i'm wary of the the illusion that getting involved in political discourse especially on the internet that it that it does anything except to make the go forward you know you're absolutely

**SPK_0:**
correct i absolutely agree with you and what i mean by involvement and in terms of basically i like that your answer was about what you can do so immediately put into category of action which is the key element i just put that to this uh range of advisors i think it's very important to as you know in the genesis like basically one of the main human uh let's say uh power power of adam is the power to give names and that's what i think is where like what i mean by political activity i don't mean by political activity you know participate what is expected in the participation of talking about taxes or talking about other things i think what i mean by political activity is by thirsty for example then whether it be political activity or domestic activity is that that say those very uh in that direction you know connecting stakeholders so that's that is that the play uh i mean we i think that that's it many poultry digestable weapons another one i'll pick over there yeah a village has a political side to it and just to be even at least to be capable of withstanding these different like elements which is coming from the outside you need to understand what you are and for this you need a language and for this you need a way to show to describe to just name these things the way they are because otherwise it's hard to explain let's say what is exactly your what is exactly your position let's say was an idea of uh inclusion let's say why are you exactly opposing and we go into these very lengthy details about let's say well that's a one rational argument for it well that's as a philosophy that's a let's say biological argument whereas you can say well i just don't watch it don't want to worship this idol and i don't think that's what unites me and since it's the idol which is proposed to be put in the center of my community i oppose to it that's what i mean by it like i just mean i think building and this can be done i think ultimately first and like practicing it like bruce beetle this kind of the same of acting that's what i'm trying to do like mostly in russian but that's what i'm trying to trying to when i talk about the different process i'm trying to underlie like the different basic patterns which are happening like why people are doing these irrational things well because because that's what is happening so i mean i also

**SPK_1:**
want to be careful like i really i want to be careful that people don't think that i'm saying that there's no room for political involvement you know because one of the things too is that we also different people play different roles we don't we all kind of have different roles and different strengths and different capacities in in this world and so there i think that my the role that i can play is more in terms of story and in terms of helping people understand the basic structures and helping them understand this question of participation but you know i i think that downstream from that in there will be legislation like there has to be there will be people proposing laws there will be people uh you know redefining you know levels of authority and power and understanding what those powers are related to our own you know like uh when i talk about a kind of fractal system of identity and authority that this is something that can have real consequences in the world and and and can reform the way that bonds are are exist uh oh yeah but but i think that that's the work that has to be done first and i think some Jesse Unity came out right at the time or if it's something that the typical the the political system and then infinity's i think that that that that sometimes you have to to understand that theained space is uh art that's that processing space right and it's constantly changing and so that's all and then another one about like are there ever really any sort of like a subliminal movement that's in place where it's like one thing is being made in one small style that gets thrown away is littered漂亮 one thing is access to such spaces you know and i'm thinking of the economics world right because the cat was really a data science thing i'm thinking i'm thinking of all of the sense of Americans who work college and i'm thinking of immediacy of the problem but i i can't like myself oh i can tell you you are doing good no no but i feel like i'm getting sucked into an into a vortex of you know yeah this like spinning thing that doesn't have doesn't totally yeah well i i think here i can actually cheer you

**SPK_0:**
up or maybe it won't be that cheerful because knowingly or unknowingly i think you are involved into these processes and even bigger on the most on the highest level because in a real hierarchy of power and like i don't have time to talk too much about it the ultimate power is a power of a story the power of idea the power is a story centricity so by creating an alternative story so more like reviving the true stories like it is a political action like i don't know that's even let's say the revival of symbolical thinking as such like the reviving of this images of images of unity the reviving of your image of the mountain like you have a political impact like that's what i think is inescapable and we just need to understand what we are involved with like basically whenever you are touching the um issues of meaning you are making a political action like and that's in the very that's why for example there was this original debate between christianity and the roman empire because even christians thought that they were not involved in a political activity the roman empire thought very well that they were like by the creating the complete alternative system of meaning you willingly or not you are participating into it and i think it's a very just a cool thing to be aware of like in a good way like so on the most basic way so effectively you're just keeping the whole boring part and just going to

**SPK_1:**
the nuts but it was a crux of it no i i mean i i agree i would say yeah i i would say that there are definitely political implications to the things that i'm that i'm talking about in doing um but i ultimately let other people work that out in my in my particular case and also work it out more locally in their own in their own uh in their own sphere

**SPK_0:**
uh absolutely no it's just uh i think that's exactly the trick like so what we the kind of for real like people because people don't really ask what we can be done right now etc etc and i think it can be done on unfortunately kind of skipping the whole thing we've been holding the most important for the last let's say 400 years this whole middle part part of the state the part of administrative etc etc it can be done on the one side on the power of communities what you mentioned yourself family local uh elements and at the same and at the same time on the highest level which is the power of words the power of ideas the power of meetings and only then there can be some connection involved through this because the middle part right now we cannot even talk about it and i think that's what kind of i mean the most we cannot even talk about what is happening really like you do occasionally like and we can do occasionally but realistically on the most level people don't understand that's what people don't understand and we're not there yet to explain that for example the way people treat even they would say presidential candidates or political candidates are idyllic they do treat them they treat them as like oh that's the idol who will save them and they're not there yet to explain that for example the way people treat this process or this side and it's inevitable because we have no other unity we don't have the hands of all things together so we have we are in an inevitable process of creating them yeah it's

**SPK_1:**
funny it's actually quite it's funny to watch it happen like it's like in my country it's even funnier because at least the president can have some kind of like pretension of being a central spoke that kind of holds things together but in a prime minister like in canada you know we treat our prime minister like the president even though our prime minister is the head of a is an elected seat in the head of a government and is you know and could be kicked out of his own party at any time that they vote against him but we still treat him like a little king because it's like we just want you know we like you said it's just it's just inevitable and if people were more aware of it then they would do it more reasonably than and

**SPK_0:**
it's a weird and honestly chiller away yeah and that's i think that's uh one of the big reasons of where the whole neurosis neurotization of the whole political processes is coming from because what people actually the actual desire of people in their political figures and other things uh is way different from what they think the desire is so they want the unity they want a god to worship but they say they want i don't know free health care and it's not the same yeah exactly

**SPK_1:**
right yeah that's all right and then and then it's also this like how can i say this it's it's also this this idea that if like if the wrong president let's say the wrong president is is elected if the wrong prime minister is elected then we're going to live in hell like it's all going to fall apart like everything is finished because everything just depends on this like little this this this this guy and and like i said if you ask someone if they believe that they would say of course i don't believe that but they act everybody acts as if that's the that's the case um you know and when in fact like you like we intimated at the outset there are real principalities that are moving these things along and those are are the let's say the the gods that are kind of moving the the system are invisible to most like we worship them without totally knowing it or we worship through these proxies and we can't see what it is that is being that is being moved by the system and we can't see what it is that is being

**SPK_0:**
managing us oh yeah absolutely like and well sometimes they even say it like i don't know if you i mean i know you're following it but as it's exactly i think the it's my favorite of your videos since when you for example take some event and you show like the symbolism of this event which pretends not to be symbolic at all you can see in paris olympics that was just sorry that's principalities are literally there or you can see on all of this uh let's say environmental meetings when they almost literally nowadays worship game like almost literally like like and sometimes literally like and you pretend that it's neutral it's not religious but it's like it's just think and that's what i mean and everybody else kind of have to but that's what i think i think the one of the main reasons people are participating in these games is because they don't know they don't have to and they don't have a language not to have to and that's what i mean like you can't just still have an alternative you don't have something to work

**SPK_1:**
the truly worship that you don't have to have an alternative you don't have something to work that is worthy of their worship you know and i think that's one of the things that that that can help is that if you know what the source of reality is and you understand the nature well you don't understand it but you you direct your attention to the to the highest aspect you know to the highest transcendent truth then then at least you know like how you're orienting yourself but every like you said everybody needs that and because they they deny it at the they end up you know they end up uh grasping at all these different principalities that just

**SPK_0:**
appear and disappear and uh yeah and then you can actually ask the important question if we have to be united through the worship of a principality let's maybe be careful about which one we are worshiping let's choose at least the real one let's not choose the illusionary one

**SPK_1:**
yeah let's not choose a parasite something that is actually feeding on you in order to to maintain its existence and to be united through the worship of a principality

**SPK_0:**
you know because the real because the principalities are real for example like you can like as we mentioned like the way we treat so many different things like progress or especially progress and economy like mostly like that's kind of the two main things

**SPK_1:**
uh some progress is the best one because it's what the hell what is this progress you're talking about no open progress is what people worship there's actually no telos it's like it's it's something like inclusion it's like well there is palace it

**SPK_0:**
it's exactly the teleth of receiving gold and like effectively it's sorry i know i i mean in this case it won't sound crazy it's literally not different from kerfa genius worshiping the mola barton is literally exactly the same and i actually think i wouldn't be surprised if progress and moloch has one of the same name because you bring your future in a in a view of your fourth born and there are like slaves and all of the different things and you get the biggest material prosperity ever seen on a planet by that time i don't see much difference in the ways that people treat progress i'm sorry it's and they also expect immortality from it just a little bit like now they just also expect immortality progress that's an interesting idea even like

**SPK_1:**
the idea the idea of credit like because i've been trying to understand credit for years but i just had an insight when you were talking about it that that credit is something like sacrificing your children like it really is that i can't believe i never thought about that because what i am going to sacrifice the future for now and so i'm going i'm willing to sacrifice my children's life in order to get what i need what i need right now huh yeah that's that's such a great it's such a simple insight and i never how is it that i never seen that you know i've said it similar to that like i've talked about the idea of of but i've never thought of it really as a kind of moloch uh sacrifice right and so i'm going to sacrifice my children's life in order to get what i like the idea of the sacrifice of the of your children because i talked about it in terms of abortion like because abortion is clearly that right it's like a woman says i have this child in me i'm going to kill it and then my life will be better it's like it's basically saying i want something now and this future thing that's going to cause me all this trouble you know i want to uh and but credit is different but it's something like that it's something similar

**SPK_0:**
like it but it's the same pattern just playing out differently if you're talking about uh and even let's not go into the same uh as even on a lighter levels and abortions the pattern is still the same that's why i think moloch is one of the main bots of this kind of uh at least capitalist monastery like uh or like the capitalist structure because when a person is saying okay i will sacrifice my family or let's say nowadays a woman says i will sacrifice my family for a career and then in 20 years i will maybe come back to it it is and the thing is the pattern you know it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's not it's that this thing which is sacrifice is given it is fulfilling a certain part of a deal it is bringing material prosperity just in the end it will trick you as any demon will but in a part it brings you the prosperity let's say you want more money in your 20s you will get more money in your 20s it's the only chance i'm sorry if you bring this but it's the same it's literally the same so you you want your money you will get your money are you dampering your future yes but that's the part of a deal

**SPK_1:**
yeah i love it i love it i'm seeing a lot of things that make that make sense see i even i hadn't even i also hadn't thought about the idea of people having children later in life as something like that as well right it's like i i want my i want my youth for myself right instead of for others instead of giving my youth to giving my youth to my children right because usually that was the normal way to go which is that you want to have kids uh you know you want to have kids uh you know you want to have kids uh you know you want to have kids you want to have kids and your you know your money and your wealth is spent on your on your kids that's like a normal thing but now there's this weird thing uh super interesting definitely

**SPK_0:**
stuff to think about and i think that's what i just mean by bringing the language and but the final was the kind of first step to start talking about this i think the reason why it's so hard to see is because exactly we created this force let's say we've created the world let's say between symbolical and theological reality and let's say economical political and uh like sociological reality but it is a very modern understanding and medical was in a way to show it's just it's very short and like there is much more to say but it was a conscious effort to kind of separate these things but the problem is is by nature they are inseparable because that's as you well know that's a human nature according to the father said we have like this desire for the immanent we have this let's say horizontal desire but we also have this vertical desire And we are inescapable of this pattern no matter how much we try.
But nowadays, we just spend like generations and hundreds of years in this separate state.
So on a very deep level, we have this border and we just don't connect the dots.
But once you connect them, it kind of becomes clear what is happening and why it is happening.
Like the question what to do, you already answered.
But one thing is to understand it.
That's what I think is like.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
Yeah, it makes sense.
Listen, Pavel.
I have to go.
Yeah, I know.

**SPK_0:**
So sorry.
I have another appointment.

**SPK_1:**
But this is great.
Great conversation.
I really appreciate it.

**SPK_0:**
Well, then thank you for your time.
Thank you for your time.
I hope there will be more conversations between us to come.
And obviously, I will put the links of all of your work, etc, etc, like in the description.
And see you again in just one second.
