
**SPK_0:**
I actually know a Georgian guy that died at a supra because the soldiers came to kill him Yeah, and he threw the supra first and says first before we fight.
Let's have supra He had supra and they killed him It was during the Abkhaz Civil War Civil War.

**SPK_1:**
Isn't that nuts?
That's nuts

**SPK_0:**
And his family to this day is without him obviously, but they honor him He did the thing.
There's a tradition in Georgia to say wait before we fight.
Mmm.
That's it.
We have supra we feast Afterwards if we still want to fight Then we can fight They were attempting to To unify the greatest minds in order to answer questions around the table.
That's what they were doing

**SPK_1:**
Okay, I mentioned a good time and I can even turn this into a good table I guess what what I meant was like imagine the time I die himself being as being as a in a position of a source and Leader trying to do it rationally not just giving rational topics But everything about him is about the calculation rationality or risk management formulas, etc table would not work Well, if you're using the time, it is a pattern of a sorority which again hierarchy sorority That's a tragedy like for those people who say why would you need to talk about?
This in a way that this quote-unquote smart grace will and I said well Like it or not in a way we leave Those people who are called to be and the fact that I call to be that is simply the fact that they are here is a sad philosophical truth you know who deserves power?
Those who have it.
That's a tragedy.
If you think that somebody undeservingly is having the power, you're lying to yourself.
There is something in that unity that that's the only power it can produce.

**SPK_0:**
This is deep and dark.

**SPK_1:**
It's dark.

**SPK_0:**
And it's happening right now.

**SPK_1:**
You can't run away from this general structure, general pattern.
All you can do is hope that there will be better Tamadas.
On every level of reality, and that's why this universal particular dance is so important, you can start being better Tamada in your life.
What you are doing right now, it's a very practical advice.
Do a supra.
Be a better Tamada on your level of reality.
Maybe it will be just the level of yourself.
Maybe it will be the level of your group of friends.
Maybe it will be the level of your family.
But basically throwing the table together, creating the community, taking the cross of authority, that's the only way you do it.
And then you can hope that in some way this will change the spirit of a body.
And then out of this body, maybe some better leader or bigger Tamada will appear.

**SPK_0:**
If you go to our website and First Things Foundation, and then you see that our tagline is creation begins with sacrifice.
And it's sort of like pedestrian and cheesy.
Just the way to solve everyone's problems is to throw a table.
If people were like, okay, have you ever noticed that these guys all get together and then their solution to all the problems is to do the thing that they love.
It's kind of gross, except for once.
It works.
Because I want to say why it works.
It's because, guys, throw a table, sit together, drink wine, and toast.
Do you know what the sacrifice is?
I'm being really serious.
So let's do that tonight.
The sacrifice is of time.
It's time that you want to spend on your own watching Netflix.

**SPK_1:**
Or just with this device.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Or with your phone.
Just with the person you like.
You see?
Because if it's too...

**SPK_1:**
Sanitize.

**SPK_0:**
I can sanitize and control.
With one, I can sanitize and control.
With two, I can sanitize and control.
With five, I'm starting to get beyond this point.
Now, that guy always talks about this.
I don't want to deal with that.
But the sacrifice is so profound in your life.
If you do three in a week, the sacrifice is so profound.
But I'm just telling you, the creation or what is born of the sacrifice, which is how we know life is designed that way.
We know this from our God.
Like, I love people who go, you sure?
Sacrifice?
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
It's just, it's the actual

**SPK_0:**
image of Christ.

**SPK_1:**
Do you want a hotter topic?
Like a hotter version of this?
Yeah, bring a hotter topic.
Eros.
Eros, because of the sacrifice.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.
Eros is the thing.

**SPK_1:**
Because the meaning of creation you're using can...
Basically, you're talking about Eros.
Eros.

**SPK_0:**
And so you have to do it.
And when you do it, your wife also, or whoever cooks, there's about 50 sacrifices.
And what happens is, is when that's that sacrifice to create, create this dinner for others becomes the pattern, you live, you live, you live.
But you'll know what else you do.
You get poorer.
What I mean by that, you're going to make less money because you spent it on the dinners and you spent all your time sitting with other people.
So think about that.
What we're really asking when we say do a supra.
If everybody does supra, I'm telling you, we're asking you to participate in 1310 Medieval Village because you will have less and like it.
I like, what's his name?

**SPK_1:**
World, oh my goodness, he will own us and he will be happy.

**SPK_0:**
You will own and have less wealth, but I mean it, you will like it.
I'm telling you, that's the place you have to go.
But this is just Christianity.
It's just St.
John Chrysostom talks about, you got a lot of cargo in your ship, but guess what?
It's going to flip over into the ocean and you're going to sink down into the ocean with the cargo.
It's just the way it works.
Too much cargo is a sign of illness.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.
And it's just, no, and you know what?
You can't even escape it.
Like as another, I can, I can make it slightly darker, not slightly, very much darker, which I love to do.
This part about sacrifice, like how basically it's only out of sacrifice.
Let's say a power comes, like power comes only out of sacrifice.
Guess what?
You're still doing it.
And people are still literally it's happening everywhere.
Like you can't escape this pattern.
Think about it.
You go for a walk, you go for a gym to get the power of your body.
You're repeating exactly the same.

**SPK_0:**
Creation begins with sacrifice.
And so that which is begins with sacrifice.
We know this because that's how the world was created.
God knew that this would happen in order for us to exist.

**SPK_1:**
And there would not, it can go in a very dark way, but that's what we also need to be aware of.
Especially.
In 2026, I mean, coming back to a certain island, you think you can run away from this pattern?
Well, you can't.
If you are not willing to sacrifice anything, there will be people who are, and they will know this law because there is a power element in creation.
And I want just to highlight this.
So creation says power element and sacrifice.
The only choice is what do you sacrifice?
You can sacrifice.
All like Tamada sacrifices himself to the table.

**SPK_0:**
This is the answer Epstein and these characters, by the way, people might not like this, this language, but I really want to take this back through history, Epstein, Zionism, American manifest destiny, English colonialism, all the various European colonialism's, uh, the, the, the conquest of the South America.
Through the Spaniards, they go back to the Romans.
You can pick, there's a whole series, Monsa Musa in West Africa.
And, and, uh, the, the, the capture of basically the gold trade in West Africa, through Monsa Musa, various Mohammedan movements.
They're all of the same species.

**SPK_1:**
Ultimately, there is only one choice of power.
Who do you sacrifice?

**SPK_0:**
But those people are sacrificing others on behalf of their, but, but it's the same process.

**SPK_1:**
And you will get power.
Like that's a tricky part.
You will get power.

**SPK_0:**
Like that's, that's a, well, it's, it's evident you'll get power.
And so these characters, Epstein are studying the saints of the worldly control mechanism, which is Satan, no offense.
They're studying the works of Satan in order to understand how to get that, which comes next.
It's like, this is, should it not be for a Christian?
This shouldn't be like complicated.
Okay.
So wherever you see that pattern, a Christian should recognize it.
And what happens?
Well, we know what happens.
Martyrdom happens.
This is, this is how the, if we've had a Christian state and that's probably arguable, it's because there were martyrs who were willing to say the creation of something like a beautiful thing in the world will be created by my blood, not by yours.
I will not take yours.
I will let you take mine.
And here's why I wanted to bring this up.
When the crazy loud liberal progressive is screaming about colonialism.
This is what I don't like about politics these days, and especially about Orthodox, many Orthodox converts.
We need to be in alliance with them.
They are recognizing the proper, their anger is properly disposed toward an evil.

**SPK_1:**
The problem is that their solution is.

**SPK_0:**
Now you got it.
The problem is, is their, their antos, the thing that they're being, the thing they want me to be is dead.
Yeah.
But their anger is, it has, it's properly directed.
And what I'm trying to say, there's such an opportunity for unity right now in the world, because.

**SPK_1:**
That's a silver lining against the background of all of this.
And that's the tricky part.
I think that's why throwing the table is so, so important.

**SPK_0:**
You beat me to it.

**SPK_1:**
What is the story of this sacrifice of the others?
Like ultimately, it has one ultimate weakness.
It doesn't really work in a long.
Long term when everyone, two conditions, when everyone is aware of it.
So when you can't lie to yourself that that's not what is happening.
People are for some reason, quote unquote, uncomfortable when it is happening in your face.
That's why we want to.

**SPK_0:**
When what is happening?

**SPK_1:**
When you have that the power is derived from a sacrifice of the other.
I got you.

**SPK_0:**
Classic, classic worldly politics.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
We need, we need to frame it in a, we really need to frame it.
Right.
Like otherwise something in us rebels.
The tragedy, that's a tragic element.
The tragedy.
Of modern time.
Being uncomfortable itself is not enough.
And I think that's why there is a scary part of this whole story that it's suddenly starting happening in your face.
And there is a challenge to everyone.
What are you going to do?

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
I'm like this.
So what are you going to do?
And currently on our level, on a level of worldly powers, basically we hear crickets.
Like they kind of, I don't know.
I don't like exactly this, but I'm kind of on the same ladder, but just like a little bit down the road.

**SPK_0:**
They're using the same construct.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
Just okay.
Maybe I'm not ready to do this, but effectively I am still in the same game.
So what are you going to do?
Well, your answer is pretty straightforward.
Throw a table.

**SPK_0:**
Throw a table.
Acquire humility.
Yeah.
Die to yourself.
I know people don't want to hear this, but this is how it works.
Die to yourself and be generous and open your house for other people.
Like this is the actual act of fighting the machine.
You know what's not?
Christian nationalism.
Wait.
So you're going to embrace the entirety of the worldview that you supposedly are against in order to acquire the thing called Christian nationalism?
I mean, who does this?
Well, you know who does it?
A lot of people do it.
White nationalism.
What is this?
What are you guys doing?
What are you doing?
It's an embrace.
You have not yet emerged from the narrative that is killing you.
You have to emerge all the way out of that narrative.

**SPK_1:**
You need a different language.

**SPK_0:**
You need a different language.
Exactly.
You need the language of the Supra, the liturgy.
Liturgy.
The liturgy is the right answer.
And my whole point in this is it's so radical.

**SPK_1:**
That's the thing.
The simple idea about-

**SPK_0:**
It's so radical.

**SPK_1:**
Even on a smaller level, and I'm not saying it's easy, just to be absolutely clear, just start dining together at your home, even as a family.
Even if you start eating again together as a family, in a modern way, it is already a sacrifice in actual fighting.

**SPK_0:**
You know, you can eat this way together too.
Yeah.
It's really easy.
It's not-

**SPK_1:**
It is easy, but it's not-

**SPK_0:**
No.
Hold on.
Let me say it differently.
The mechanics are easy.
Yeah.
The mechanics are.
You don't have to have wine every time.
You just simply toast.
But guess what?
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
All the health starts getting worse.

**SPK_0:**
All the vulnerability comes out, and then your kid's looking at you all weird.
Your 15-year-old's like, Papa, do we have to toast to the dead again?
Do it every time, please.
Yeah, we should.
We should probably not have a day where we don't remember our dead.
Why would we?
Maybe a couple days.
Okay, fine.
But why aren't we remembering?
By the way, when people hear this, it's not like hours of sitting at a table and remembering.
It's just like to our parents or to our grandparents, and I remember them well, to their name.
It's not like-

**SPK_1:**
To your great-aunt today, like something.

**SPK_0:**
It's not complicated stuff.
It's important.
But it's deep.
It's deep.

**SPK_1:**
But it's super deep.
Super deep.
Super deep.
That's a battlefield.
That's a battlefield, because you can't expect essentially different outcomes of the same hearts.

**SPK_0:**
It's better put than a language.
Well, it's a language.

**SPK_1:**
It's a heart.
Language is the consequences of this.
Yes.
Exactly.
Yes.
But guess what I'm saying?
That's why it's so much usually easier to be in a critic position, and obviously I understand, but you need to be aware of what exactly you are criticizing.
Are you criticizing the game or your place in the game?

**SPK_0:**
This is great.
This is great.
This is great.
But this is coming to an end now in America.
I can't speak for Russia.

**SPK_1:**
No, I mean, it's coming way quicker down there.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
The red and the blue, anytime you catch yourself in that now, as someone trying to move toward crucifixion and resurrection, if you get into the red and the blue, it's almost like porn.
It's just passions at that point.
The red is not fixing, the blue is not fixing.
It's a brand new narrative.
And I think that's why orthodoxy is so appealing.
It's because it feels like a new narrative, but it's old.
It's not new.
It's Christian.
I don't have to jettison all my Christianity?
No.
You don't have to become a Hindu.
It's a whole different bag.
And so again, I don't have all the answers, but I've gotten a world-class education by doing this table and starting this nonprofit.
So I'm just trying to share the blessing.
It's weird, because I don't even...
You're crazy.
You came over here, then you're looking at me in the face, like a brother, which we are.
But I can feel like you've totally imbibed the mojo.
And then I'm looking at you, and I'm like, I start to realize we got blessed by this.
Something happened.

**SPK_1:**
I would say a relationship.

**SPK_0:**
I know, but it's like what it's doing to me.
It's like it's a walking experience.
It's an experience of Christianity that somehow I got responsible for, and not that I'm in any way sharing Christianity, I'm trying, but I'm sharing a super which constantly educates me on my own sins, my riffraffness, but also on the potential of like beauty and joy.
It's kind of nuts.
Okay.
And it's the liturgy, but it's not the liturgy, but it's the liturgy.

**SPK_1:**
Can you explain that?
It's the liturgy.
I mean, as we discussed, it's liturgical, but it's not liturgy.
And ultimately, it's of the same pattern, just on a lower level of reality.
And because it's on a lower level of reality, it's legitimately more open.
Like for example, we are not healthy, and we can't avoid it.
But for example, you have a family with different denominations, or just Atheist and Christian, or like, I don't know, Muslim and Christian would be harder than one family, but actually you can have it in like in Russia, it happens.
You can go to the liturgy together.
You can't.
Like you can, but it will be weird.
Yeah.
Like it won't work, you know, like it's...

**SPK_0:**
It'll die at some point.

**SPK_1:**
It will die at some point, but you can still throw a table together.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
And it will not be the same.
It won't do the true, true miracle through mystery, but it will do many mysteries and miracles.
That's what I mean.
Like when it's liturgical, but it's of the same tree, but it's a lower branch, and that's why it's so beautiful.
And that's why now it's important.
But I want to kind of bring it up.
It's one big topic we didn't talk yet, and it actually fits perfectly.
It's about leftovers, and it's about abundance, and it's about this whole idea of sacrifice, resilience, and relationship.
What I mean is the tragedy of modern condition or any political condition, yeah, is that it's necessarily against somebody.
There is no politics for common good.
I'm sorry, guys.
There is none.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think social treaties and social contract treaties don't work.
I'm sorry.
For Americans, Locke was wrong.
It doesn't work.

**SPK_0:**
He just literally undermined the entirety of the American project.
Like, go ahead.
It's good.
It's fine.

**SPK_1:**
It's not a new statement.
If you limit your world to politics, you will necessarily end up being against someone.
There is nothing else in politics.
That's the tragedy of human condition.
But you can also...
That's a mistake.
That's a mistake.
You can't put it aside.
What I mean by putting it aside, close your eyes on it.
Pretend that there is no against, because there is.
So what can we do?
Well, we can do a step above it.
You cannot basically be against it, but you can move above it.
And that's what the table does.
So the tragedy is like, whatever choices people are offered nowadays, generally speaking, we are offered choices to be against always.
And there are things we need to be against, but not for the sake of being against.
That's what is lost in the process.
What is the good?
What is what we are for?
And ultimately, the table, it is exactly the answer.
So the table is for the relationship.
Don't build relationship against somebody, just build relationship.
That's kind of the starting point, I think, nowadays.
But how?
Throw a table.
Nowadays, I think it's one of the few, let's say, truly open paths to remember how to be in a relationship.

**SPK_0:**
There's a quick story on that.
Yeah.
When we started the restaurant, I had been throwing soup on and off with friends for a lot of years since I returned from Georgia.
These are often secular friends.
And we had great time, often down in Naples, Florida, to those people who are listening.
But I hadn't thought of it as anything other than something that brought people together and all of this stuff I knew.
But anyway, and then the restaurant came.
And so then the arena is a public place certified by the city of Greenville.
And the arena has high stakes, because people are giving you money to do this.
Before, we just threw it all the time, because it was fun, it was our thing.
And what I got feedback constantly from people was, if you put a bunch of people who don't know each other in the same room, they're going to fight.
It was like a constant feedback from the restaurant people.
And I was like, I don't...
When they would explain, I would be like, that seems true.

**SPK_1:**
No, it seems reasonable.
It seems reasonable.

**SPK_0:**
Like, someone's going to make a toast to Trump, and then someone's going to be pissed and want to make a toast to Biden.
And then it's going to go like, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, and it's going to be that thing.
It's going to be Thanksgiving for most people.

**SPK_1:**
Well, that's why you have a tamada.

**SPK_0:**
Well, what they didn't understand is what you said, is we haven't had that problem.
It's because the game is being played above the level of politics.
Now we'll have someone dip into...
Yes.
...that layer of reality.
So I'll make a toast.
Sometimes I make a toast to the saints or to our stars, to our leaders, to people we look up to.
And someone has taken that as, I just want to toast all the things Trump's trying to do to fix this country.
That happens.
But there's something about the table.
There's some weird elixir.

**SPK_1:**
Because at this moment, it's about this person.
And you can see his pain, his vulnerability, why he's saying these words.

**SPK_0:**
By the way, that's what happens.
Because it's not...
Yeah.
It's not said with the same vitriol as online, for sure.
It's also said in person, and it's also said almost like he's trying to honor something.
And you don't want to just shit all over his honor.
There's something you don't...
Now, it flips both ways.
It flips both ways.
I've had LGBTQ people toast to marriage, and toast to their marriage, and their lesbian girlfriends right there.
And there's evangelicals at the table.
That didn't happen last night, but they're sitting right there.
They don't really like that version.
They don't like that version of marriage.
They don't think it's real.
But somehow...
And for some rigorous, they see this as sellout.
But somehow, the automata puts it back together and re-elevates it, and then it just doesn't go off the rails.
Now, sometimes...
By the way, this has to do with the automata.

**SPK_1:**
During your whole story, it's a huge cross of automata.

**SPK_0:**
It's the cross of the automata to not just weigh in on the LGBTQ person's marriage.
Yeah.
You don't get to weigh in on it.
No, you can weigh in on it, but you gotta be artistic.
You gotta invite people back to the higher idea of love between humans, men, and women.

**SPK_1:**
Higher idea of love.
And you can bring sacrifice, or something.

**SPK_0:**
By the way, that's what you do.
If you're in it to try to convince those people at the table of your excellent stand on marriage as a automata, I'm telling you, yeah, you're gonna go way off the rails.
You're gonna create division.
You're gonna not acquire stridoba.
You're gonna wonder why.
They're doing this.
And then you're only gonna invite the people you like to your table.
And that's what's gonna happen.
And then you're just creating a red table somewhere, or a blue table somewhere.
And then you...
You could still sit in that spot, but you haven't really healed.

**SPK_1:**
It all comes back to the cigar conversation.
Again...

**SPK_0:**
I know, I know, I know.

**SPK_1:**
Because this is current tragedy.
That's the current state of even pain.
As an orthodox, I would say that's the current state of pain, of brokenness.
We see around.
Well, it is there.
Can I share another story from the Supra you said yesterday?
Please, please.
It's about the right way of doing it.
And sometimes it's easier to explain by example.
As you said, we are in the South, an American South.
And you're in this neighborhood and you share the story how, like, just recently, you had a group of people from a Baptist church coming to your place, and a lady there, at one moment, burst into tears.
And you felt like some deep-severed links were reconnected.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
But she was...
This was a...
African-Americans from this side of the tracks, in the Southern segregation history.
They were from the part of Greenville that was segregated.
And they came to eat at our restaurant.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
So what happened?
What happened, very unique, which you can't do in a New World culture, because it makes no sense.
You didn't make an idol of their story.
You didn't make an idol of their...
Pain.
But you saw them, and they were seen.
And this rebuilds connection.
You understand why it's impossible in the New World?
Because we just don't understand the choice.
If I'm seeing it, then I immediately put it in the context of idolization.
That's right.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.

**SPK_1:**
Like, I need to make an idol out of your pain.
Even on a person...

**SPK_0:**
This is the white liberal temptation.
Yeah.
It's like, oh my gosh, you guys, we have to help you because of all the pain you went through, and all the guilt that I'm feeling, I have to fix your pain.
Yeah.
This is...
Yeah.
It's not what we tried to do at that Supra.

**SPK_1:**
Well, another stupid little thing is to pretend the pain is not there.
And that's the biggest problem why all of these conversations, and why talking can...
Why we need more tamadas on all level of reality, because that's the job of tamada.
The job of a tamada is to see the pain, to honor the pain, to honor the person, but don't make an idol neither of the person and not of the pain.

**SPK_0:**
So good.

**SPK_1:**
You see what I mean?
That's right.
Like, so you honoring, and that's the language of honor.
You're returning the honor, because the actual pain is the lost honor.
People lost their honor, and they are in pain.
And sometimes lost honor is like, I was betrayed by my friend.
Do you think it's not lost honor?
It is lost honor.
Yeah.
I dated this girl, and then he took away from me.
It's a lost honor.
And it's because of this pain, which stays for me forever.
Okay.
I think it stays with me forever.
Forever, let's say you are like making the choices later, and you see it this way, or again, on a societal level, a lot of pain of a lot of people over a lot of the time.
What do you do with it?
You can still honor the person.
You can still- You have to.
You need to restore the honor, but to restore the honor is not to make an idol, because we end up always in the false alternatives.
Like the worst thing you can do is not see the pain.
And again, just on a political level, you didn't see, let's say, the pain of a Rust Bell for 20 years.
Yeah.
It's called Trump.
Sorry, liberals.
That's the way.
Oh, I see.
You didn't see the pain of people from global.
You can disagree with their reaction, but you need to acknowledge the pain first.
You need to restore the honor if you don't want an outcome of destruction.
That's very straightforward.
That's very simple.
On a bigger scale, basically, like it or not, I will connect it with a different, another hot topic, controversial.
Believe it or not, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russians didn't see it as a lost and a cold war.
For them, it was a sign of peace.
We legitimately went through the solution of this process with an open heart, sacrificed a lot.
It cost us a lot, right?
A better future for everyone to put as a legitimate attempt to put conflict aside.
What did you do?
You expanded your military structures towards us.
The pain is real.
The broken honor is real.

**SPK_0:**
This story makes total sense to me, because people forget is it was 20 years of literally tearing down your own system in order to be free of what the Russian became aware of as evil.
And then the West doubles down and goes...

**SPK_1:**
No matter what the system, we'll still be enemies.
That's the message.
You can disagree, but that's the message heard and why it happened.
I'm not saying you need to support everything you do, but you need to at least see the pain.

**SPK_0:**
You have to honor.

**SPK_1:**
You need to honor.

**SPK_0:**
You have to honor what's good in someone, even though you don't like them.
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
That's beautiful.
That's beautiful.

**SPK_0:**
That's Christianity.
That's Christianity.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
Good.
Real.
True.
Pain.
And that's the thing.
Pain is true.
Even if you disagree with the source of the pain and you think it's a dumb way to do it, you can still honor the pain, because it's real.

**SPK_0:**
But Mamuka, the one who told me how to do supra, and then also Nino Garmashili, who's a historian in Georgia who we talked to, they both said that the currency of the supra is honor.
Yeah.
It's what is valued above all else at the supra, is I'm going to honor you.
You're going to honor me.
So I know your family to have been ...
Your grandfather killed my grandfather.
But you sit before me and I'm going to honor you, not for the killing, but for your very being.
You have children.
And as a father, I honor you as a father.
Why can't I tell you that?
If you just think about your worst enemy, they still have participated in good.
Your very worst enemy.

**SPK_1:**
And guess what?
The only way to really transcend the state of enemy, because that will make him vulnerable, truly vulnerable.
That's right.
That's right.
You know what makes an enemy truly vulnerable?
If you are in a place ...
You need a place to do it.
You can't do it on a battlefield.
You can't do it in an election.
That's not places.
But you can do it at the table.
You can do it at the liturgy.
Sorry, that's the whole point.
That's the whole point.
We come together and then confess, and then we come ...

**SPK_0:**
We can do it.
We have to do it.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
So that's the story.
And it is an antidote.
That's what I mean.
And it is universal.
But back to what it requires.
It does require sacrifice.
It starts with a sacrifice.
And the first sacrifice is ...
Use the sacrifice as a tamada who is invited to such a table.
Do you think it's easy to run a table between Monteki and Capuleti from the literature?
Imagine these two families around one table, and you have to run it.
There are times when ...

**SPK_0:**
I tell you, the hardest ones are big business.

**SPK_1:**
Well, because it is constant snake business.
There's something there.

**SPK_0:**
They don't trust each other.

**SPK_1:**
Of course they don't.
I know.
Because they're all relationship and based on backstabbing.
It's wild.
It's the foundation.

**SPK_0:**
And they want super.
So that's their humanity coming out.

**SPK_1:**
Good.
There is still something human.
Well, as we know.
We do know.
There is human in everyone until the very end.
After the death, then complicated.
But why I brought it back to abundance?
Because that's another thing.
To honor somebody, you need to create a very particular thing.
A particular space.
You create a place of abundance.
For some reason, when you are in a place of abundance, you can honor people more.
I just noticed it happen.

**SPK_0:**
Totally connected.
100%.
Generosity is the beginning of the Supra.
In the Georgian tradition, they put all the food they're going to serve on the table before you sit down.
Did you see that?

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, I know.
It's so weird for me.

**SPK_0:**
It's insane, right?

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
It's always a beautiful dish.

**SPK_0:**
It's just stacked upon each other.
And you're like ...
There's no way everybody's going to eat all this.
And the women who are cooking, they're like, I know that already.
Why do you keep telling me?
When the Americans come to go, we're not going to be able to eat all this.
The Georgians are like, that's what you noticed?
Wait a minute.
They're like, hold on a second.
So I spent the entire two days doing this.
And you notice that there's too much?
They see that as something wrong with you.
A dishonor.
It's a dishonor.
Well, of course there's too much.
You're my guest.
Don't worry.
It's going to be eaten.
What do you think?
I'm going to take out all this and just dump it in the ground?

**SPK_1:**
What are you doing?
What are you doing?

**SPK_0:**
You're focusing on the wrong thing.

**SPK_1:**
What are you doing?
Because there is an openness to the possibilities of more connections than you are.

**SPK_0:**
Well, that's why they do it.
That's why they do it.
Because it's an image and it's a symbol of all the potentiality.
It's all here right now.
And so the other reason they do it at the beginning, you're like, well, now the cheesebread is going to be cold.
They're like, yeah, we do a little cold cheese bread.
But now all the food is here for the rest of the evening for all the words, for all the logos, for the meaning.
You don't have to worry about that.

**SPK_1:**
Among those meanings, there might be some which miraculously will heal somebody.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
I think it is a way of invitation.
This abundance is a way of invitation.
And it's exactly invitation or invocation or a good, quote unquote, incantation of good spirits which lead to the healing of people.
Pain.
Pain can be only solved through abundance.
You can't solve the pain from minimalization.

**SPK_0:**
By the way, that's Petitsas.
He's like, why are we going to return to the deficit in order to understand the healing?
Just point the person toward the beauty, toward the abundance.
Let it overflow.
And when it overflows, that's the healing opportunity.
The Freudian way is to constantly revisit the deficit, the pain.
But no, go to the abundance.
Yeah, this is a natural way to become healed.
I don't know why people don't understand that.
Personally, it's kind of weird.
You could also say it's dark.
It's dark.
You could argue it's purposeful.
It's a way to keep people in their suffering.

**SPK_1:**
Even without ill intention, but that's the only way.
We can keep people in their suffering and mitigate the risks and just keep some safety checks so it doesn't explode completely.
That's the choices we are offered.
Well, it doesn't work because pain builds up.
That's another thing, like back to the point.
Yeah.
Outside of abundance, pain builds up.
And then it erupts.
And it's ugly.

**SPK_0:**
There's another problem, which is really interesting.
And this is the coolest part.
The coolest problem with that construction, which is basically a nihilist construction of how life works.
By the way, the two biggest, I want to go back to what I was going to say.
I just want everybody to know.
I could be wrong.
I just want everybody to know.
And I don't know how long we're going to keep talking.
But the two biggest fights in American culture or Western culture right now, the two massive battles that have to be waged still, the first one is evolution.
We cannot, at any level in society, continue to tell that story as our origin story.

**SPK_1:**
It's a bad story.

**SPK_0:**
The smartest person on any campus should be like, eh, it might not be true.
The least any college should be filled with is someone who's going, possibly not true.
Okay.
Jordan Peterson, stop using it as the template for all of your theories.
You have to stop.
If you don't stop, you'll continue to create atheistic, slimy mammal humans as the norm.
Let me try to explain what I mean.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, please.

**SPK_0:**
The outcome of evolution is to teach me that survival of the fittest is my normal state of being.
Yeah.
Which is an exact opposite of Christianity.
Now, I just want to say this.
Evolution, as an educator, is buried and bound and weaved into every aspect of every classroom from kindergarten until 12th grade.
There is no school that escapes ...
I'm talking about Christian schools.
I'm talking about Christian schools.
They default to all kinds of weird conversations about bones.

**SPK_1:**
Dinosaur.

**SPK_0:**
I'm cool with bones.
The story you're telling about my bones cannot be the story of evolution.
You have to stop if you don't stop.
The second one is capitalism.
We have to stop telling the story of capitalism as salvific.
It's not.
It's just a choice.
It doesn't save anybody.
It doesn't make anybody better.
It's none of those things.
It's none of those things.
It doesn't do this on a spiritual level.
It is nothing but the flip side of communism.
It's just materialist economics at play.
We have to stop telling these two stories.
If we don't stop telling these two stories, we cannot exist as a society.
We have to.

**SPK_1:**
Can I dig into capitalism, socialism a little bit?
Please.

**SPK_0:**
By the way, I noticed I didn't argue for socialism.
Don't do that.
Oh, no, no.
I won't.
I didn't argue for socialism.
I'm just saying that capitalism is not salvific.

**SPK_1:**
A red flag, Soviet meme moment.
Anyway.
So, just very easy explanation.
Why it's ...
So, there is a presupposition which ...
Philosophically, which underpins the whole stupid economic debate.
That there is some objective economic laws.
Well, I'm sorry.
There are no objective economic laws.
Thank you.
Any economic laws is contingent and an outcome of an ethical choice.
What we consider to be the most important thing, generally speaking.
Just what we consider to be the most important thing.
And once you have these questions, then you build economic system to serve this purpose.
Right, right.
Basically, economic system always serves a purpose.
And this purpose is an act of choice.
In my opinion, there are only three big choices.
Well, one is a system which says that the center of everything is stuff, matter.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
And that's communism, actually.
And the second is that the center of everything is wealth as money.
That's capitalism.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
So, a little bit elaborate.
So, why communism is about stuff.
Just notice what communism is measured.
Tones of steel.
The number of planes.
I don't know, millions of shoes.
Thousands consumption of calories.
So, whenever basically you see a person describing the reality of material exchange in stuff, it's effectively communist.
Yes, yes.
So, just that's an ethical system it serves.
And whenever you see like GDP as an abstract concept, then it's a fact.
Oh, like the bank account or the shareholder value.
So, it's even more abstract.
Like you can say that capitalism just puts this matter but makes it abstract.
That's why it's kind of more.

**SPK_0:**
Well, the words, the conversation is abstract.
Yeah.
But a capitalist still thinks they're going to find their salvation.

**SPK_1:**
Oh, yeah.

**SPK_0:**
In the buying and selling of goods.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, the buying and selling of goods.
It's still there.
Problem is the third is the big third alternative.
The path which we kind of don't explore anymore.
Language, language is about human.
Like human being.
And I don't mean human as like, you know, in a humanistic way.
But the idea is like that the point of economic system like or just economy is to contribute to certain changes in human heart, like it or not.
That would be an alternative.
Otherwise, the whole debate between whether like, I don't know, the tons of steel matter or the number of zeros on bank account matter is a ridiculous argument.
Totally.
It's totally.
And it takes like, it's sad that people spend like really hours and decades on like as it's the most important thing to debate.
Like, it's a false debate.
I'm sorry.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, I 100%.
They're the same system.
It's just built for different types of materialists.
Like, we're just different types of materialists.

**SPK_1:**
Some people like stuff like I want bottles, like physically embodied bottles.
And some people have more joy of like the possibility of getting this bottle any moment, which is would be like the power of money.

**SPK_0:**
For me, I like America.
When I come home, when I participate in a capitalist society, whatever, I got no problems.
I'm all for it.
But the reason I can even be in it and still have hope is because of Christ and because I have a brother that I'm willing to honor.
And you're telling me I should cut my brother so that I get a better price when I actually go to sell in my house?
Are you crazy?
Are you crazy?
This is my brother.
This is my Christian brother.

**SPK_1:**
Relationship.

**SPK_0:**
I give him the number that he needs to move into my house.
Well, you're going to cut yourself off.
You're going to cut yourself off in the market.
What?
What are you talking about?
What kind of human being are you?
I know, but you paid this much and now you could get this much because it's your brother.
And it's objective.
Of course, because of my brother, I'm going to reduce the price.
What are you talking about?
You mean I'm not going to reduce the price?
It's my brother.
He's not really your brother.
You just go to church with him.

**SPK_1:**
What?

**SPK_0:**
What are you doing right now to me?
And you're calling yourself a Christian.
Back away from me.
You're a devil.
You're actually a devil.
What are you doing?
Of course, I'm going to give him the price he needs.
Of course, I'm going to give him that.
How are you even in this conversation with me right now as a Christian?

**SPK_1:**
I mean-

**SPK_0:**
How are you doing this?
And by the way, this happens.
No offense to evangelicals.
Watch to it.
Orthodox do it too.
Watch them sell each other a church, a building.
It's like an insanity.
It's like the first idea is first of all, how much money are we going to make toward our $2 million endowment?
Shut up.
I can't even believe that that's a Christian conversation.
You know where I learned this?
Places like Georgia.
Georgia.
You know where I learned this?
Muslim Mali.
These guys aren't trying to like, what are you talking about?
It's a brotherly, it's a thing that tells me I'm united to you.
I'm not going to cut you.
And once you've gone into that realm with a human being, you're not allowed to put the marketplace into that conversation.
Now someone's going, this sounds like nepotism to me.
Shut up.

**SPK_1:**
Well, there is some good critique of what is called nepotism.

**SPK_0:**
I don't mind critiquing nepotism.

**SPK_1:**
I will explain what's the difference.
But in the language we talked about, it's like a dishonorable way of being related or using the relationship or just manifesting the relationship.
But the solution is not cut the relationship out of the equation.
The solution is to do it in an honorable way.

**SPK_0:**
Honorable way.
Exactly.
Of course, I have to consider my brother now whether he can work for me.
He didn't just get to work for me because he's my brother.
But of course, I have to consider my brother.
How am I not going to do this?
What kind of person am I?
And I just don't know what happened to us.
The marketplace became where we find our morality.
This is super dangerous.
Super dangerous.

**SPK_1:**
Super dangerous.
And it is ultimately dehumanizing.
And again, when there is no heaven, there is no earth.
Thank you.
If you take the heaven out of equations against this horizontal we talked before, I need to make an object out of you.
You need to make an object out of me.
And it's like two objects constantly fighting against each other.
It's a necessary outcome of a horizon.
And then we look for safety in objectivity.
But there is nothing objective in anything we do.

**SPK_0:**
I love this.
This is a great conversation.
I don't know.
The only thing that's objective, right, is both.
That can see objectively and is an objective truth is God.
And so everything about you is subject to God.
Yes.
That's it.
And so the only way I can know you is...
Yes.
Like C.S.
Lewis says, I can only see you because I see the sun.
Absolutely.
And so we can...
Why can't we start with these things?
And I just know the reason.
The reason is we don't spend time and we're not vulnerable.
We don't spend time being vulnerable.
And we're not...

**SPK_1:**
Because we want safety.
We want...
We idolize our pain.

**SPK_0:**
We retreat to our mammalian being.
And by the way, this isn't just America.
This isn't Western.
No.
I'm talking about this is the human condition.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.
So just to be clear, like, yeah, so it's not Western.
Let's go as far as this possible.
Korea and Japan are in worst state right now.
I know.
We were in the worst state.

**SPK_0:**
And by the way, I'm with you a hundred percent.
And by the way, the Georgians do this stuff all the time.
That's what war is.
I'm just saying at some point, the human condition can be addressed through Christ, the crucifixion, the resurrection.
But the good news is, is all of that plays out in actual events in the world, like a super table or like actually taking a lower price on a piece of land because it's for your daughter.
There's a million things you can do on the regular.

**SPK_1:**
Or John, to reverse.
If you're in a...
In a higher position or paying a bigger price for a person you love, even if it's not a market price.
That's right.

**SPK_0:**
A hundred percent.
That's it.
It's a hundred percent.
And Christ speaks about this clearly.
The entire Christian tradition speaks about this.
It's how we gain our humanity.
These aren't like hard concepts, but they've become so difficult.

**SPK_1:**
And then what happens?
Like the whole, again, rationality behind it would be you're inviting the good possibilities which you couldn't have predicted.

**SPK_0:**
Oh, I love that.
We talked about that yesterday.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
So you're inviting them.

**SPK_0:**
The risk invites the opportunity that leads to the saintliness.
Yeah.
To lead...
Agia, to holiness.
It's so cool.
Again, I'm blessed to have...
If anything happened to me in life that I'm happy to share is that all these foreign cultures have taught me this.
That's why I don't...
Ice.
Listen, whatever ice is, I get it.
You got to obey the laws.
But ice as an entity, the spirit of ice, the spirit of ice is just...

**SPK_1:**
It's not the creation spirit.

**SPK_0:**
It's just antithetical to what...
Again, I want people who are here illegal to move.
We need jobs for the people here.
I get all the economics.
But masked men with guns, this does not work.
This is not an answer to the question.
It will do something.
It's not an answer to the spiritual question that we have.
We can get every single one of these foreign people out of our country and win and we will be bereft of the spirit.
We will be dead.
These aren't concepts that are hard.
I just get so upset.

**SPK_1:**
Well, because ultimately the debate is framed falsely.
You have the same problem.
It's literally a flipped coin of the segregation debate we had, the segregation story we had.
Is really big change, unprecedented, really happening?
If you listen to people on the right, they will be pretty real.
Sorry, you've been telling me for 30 years there is no replacement and now you are celebrating it openly.
My pain been suppressed for decades.
You want me now to be nice?
I don't want you to be nice.
That's important.
But I do want you to be kind and you can't expect it to happen on a political level.
That's another problem.
You can't expect happening on a political level.

**SPK_0:**
That's a little sad though.

**SPK_1:**
It's sad, but it's unavoidable until people throw a table, until we truly reconnect.
But it just can't.
But that's the same story.
You've been suppressing pain, but now you're making the literally same mistake.
You're making an idol out of the pain.

**SPK_0:**
It's nuts.

**SPK_1:**
Instead of honoring the pain.
People thought and people hope that there will be some honoring the pain.
And that would lead to change and change will be good and it will restore the server to order.
And there are ways to do it actually.

**SPK_0:**
This will date the recording.
I don't know how long we got to go.
I got a piece.
Andrew, how are we doing out there?
I just want to say the story I read when I got up this morning, sadly, well, before I said my prayers, I should probably have read it after I said my prayers.
Elon Musk is now saying that within three to five years, we won't talk to each other.
We'll just know each other's thoughts.
By the way, it's because of his product that he's apparently...
Neuralink?
Neuralink.
And he was so happy.

**SPK_1:**
Lord have mercy.

**SPK_0:**
And what I said, he was like, it gets rid of the difficulty of trying to use words to describe an idea.
And I was like, this dude just trying to kill poets.
He's like literally trying to kill poetry.

**SPK_1:**
Not just poetry, humanity.
I'm sorry.
That's what I'm saying.
There is a point it's being difficult.
It's difficult because it's not about expressing just ideas.
It's about expressing me.
I am not the sum of my ideas.
You are not the sum of your ideas.
That's again, it's based on the assumptions that a person is the sum of his thoughts or experiences.
But it's neither.
It's way more than this.

**SPK_0:**
But it's also an autistic guy's way to not have to explain himself because now you can just understand the beauty of his thoughts directly.

**SPK_1:**
But you can't.
I can guarantee you can know of them.
You can kind of know the data, but you won't see the beauty.

**SPK_0:**
Of course.
You just, but no offense to whatever autism is, that way of thinking, you don't get to be in charge just because you think that way.
But the problem is we keep putting these people in charge because they're good at the reason.
They're good at the stuff.
Can we have a revolution against these guys?

**SPK_1:**
Throw a table.

**SPK_0:**
Can we do it?
Throw a table.
Good.
I don't have to use guns.

**SPK_1:**
You don't have to.
Guns would not help.

**SPK_0:**
Plus he's going to have the best guns.

**SPK_1:**
But you will have the best table.

**SPK_0:**
Let's die at a table.
I actually know a Georgian guy that died at a supra because the soldiers came to kill him.
And he threw the supra first and says, first before we fight, let's have supra.
He had supra and they killed him.
It was during the Abkhaz Civil War.

**SPK_1:**
Civil War.

**SPK_0:**
Isn't that nuts?
That's nuts.
And his family to this day is without him.
Obviously, but they honor him.
He did the thing.
There's a tradition in Georgia to say, wait, before we fight, we have supra.
We feast.
Afterwards, if we still want to fight, then we can fight.
That's very classic Georgian.
They're giving up the tactical advantage of hiding in the mountains and shooting your enemy.
And that's what this guy actually-

**SPK_1:**
Well, that's only a place of hope.

**SPK_0:**
I know.
It's like, let's do something human first and then we'll see what happens.
I'll tell you one last story.
This is my last story.
I've told this story on my podcast maybe once.
It's the best story about Georgia.
It's just a way to get the flavor.
I'm in a hotel.
It's two years ago, two and a half maybe.
I'm with a woman, we'll call her Mariam.
She's Mary.
And I love her.
And I always stay at her hotel.
You guys should all too.
And it's awesome.
And I'm sitting there and she's crying.
She's not crying yet, but she's like, John, how are you?
I'm so tired.
And I'm like, what's going on?
She goes, all these Russians.
No offense to you.
And she's like, all these Russians.
I don't know what to do.
And I'm like, your hotel's filled with Russians.
I did it like the American merchant mind.
I was like, but you must be making so much money.
She goes, I'm full every night.
It's not this.
It's not the problem.
I was like, well, what's the problem?
It was the time when Putin had upgraded the-

**SPK_1:**
When there was a 2008 war.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, the-

**SPK_1:**
State of South Ossetia.
State of South Ossetia.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
Oh no.
No, and he was inviting all the young men into the Ukrainian war.

**SPK_1:**
Ah, so 2022.
I see.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, 2022.
And so many young men fled and they were all coming to Georgia.
And she's like, all these Russians, they're coming because they won't want to fight and they don't know what to do.
And I was like, what do you mean?
You're giving them rooms.
You're getting rich.
She's like, John, please.
It's because of my people.
We should close the border.
Why do we have the border open?
And then she went, but we can't close the border.
We can't.
Why would we close the border?
And she's like fighting with herself.
And I was like, well, why can't you close the border?
We're Georgians.
Why?
This is strangers.
We can't let them not come.
But I don't want them to come.
When they come, they ruin our culture.
And I was like, I know, but your hotel's full.
And she's like, what's this have to do with anything?
We lose ourselves.
And I was like, well, then close the border.
It was really hilarious.
I wish there was a camera.
So I would go back and say, well, John, how can we close the border?
We're Georgians.
We have to bring them.
These young men.

**SPK_1:**
For the context, most of these young men, especially, to give, I would imagine would be pretty new world, like as new world.

**SPK_0:**
Hot, tight, skinny jeans, whatever, Nike t-shirts, they don't even look like Russians.
I don't even know why.
You would listen.
You would look at them.
You go, there's an American.
No, it's not an American.
He's a Russian guy.
And anyway, she was just bemoaning.
And then she just started crying.
She goes, we will never close.
This is not, we will, it's always Georgia.
And then she went, we will always be defeated.
And somehow we will be here, but it's no fun.
This is my favorite scene.
Their victory is in the sacrifice.
It's nuts.
Now, again, now Georgians are like this.
There's Georgians watching this in New York.
They're like, I don't like that.
I'm a gangster.
I get it, bro.
You're a Westerner.
I got it.
But the old school, the people I met up in the mountains in the 90s during the Civil War who were holding on to whatever Georgia was after the Soviet Union, those cats are the people I'm describing.
I'm telling you.
They are.
And they'll cut you.
Don't dishonor their daughter.

**SPK_1:**
Don't dishonor.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
You get cut.

**SPK_1:**
So let's hope what we talked today somehow honored the beautiful thing you're doing, the beautiful thing which is coming through you, and let's hope it will bring good fruit.
