
**SPK_0:**
We have begun with a diagnosis of this problem of Gnosticism and the fact of its presence and the fact of its invisibility.
And now we've begun the part of teasing it apart with the first horseman of the apocalypse, reason and the way that reason operates.
In some sense, a little bit of a sense of, okay, what do we mean by reason?
And how does reason go awry?
We don't want to attach everything.
We don't want to lay it all at the foot of reason.
Reason playing its role improperly is very closely tied.
And if you're paying attention, you saw at least four or five other threads begin to come up.
So now we're beginning to really get into the heart of the matter.
We're starting to really get into the space where there's enough between us.
That hopefully we can actually really, really begin to grasp the problem we're dealing with.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, so Guilty, even in the previous episode, slipped up several times.
Really wanted to go into this particular direction, what becomes with reason in a Gnostic way, if it follows a Gnostic way.
And what becomes with reason is that knowledge becomes power or becomes equivocated with power.
And power becomes equivocated with knowledge.
There is all this interesting relationship starting playing out.
And to start telling the story of knowledge as a power, which, just in case, is the foundational slogan of our civilization, literally, knowledge is power.
Like, that's how modernity literally started, it's a famous writing of Bacon, like, so it's not an interpretation, taking something from the ground and lifting it in a spotlight.
But this story starts way before Bacon, like, in a way it starts in a garden, but it also starts in a desert.
We won't go into the garden yet, at least I'm not ready to go into the garden.
But I can remember desert, partially because I spent quite a lot of time in the last years in a desert, so it feels very close.
But it starts in the desert in Palestine, where Jesus is tempted by a devil.
And it starts with this first very practical and very particular temptation, which, truth be told, we as a secular people rarely give us even time to notice what is so...
Like, we don't go into the depths of this temptation.
Just a reminder, Jesus is fasting for 40 days, hungry, like, literally.
Like, that's kind of what is mentioned.
So, the desire arose into him, certain desires, and that's as the moment of temptation.
There are three temptations.
We start with the first.
And the first temptation is to turn stones into bread.
So, what it has to do with us?
Because the guy is hungry, make stones into bread.
Let's stop aside.
What is it?
Like, ultimately, like, on its surface level, the moment I pronounce, it's power over matter.
Like, any material form of power.
Like, it doesn't matter if it's a splitting atom.
Whether it's, I don't know, running.
running a 300,000-mile plane or whatever it is, space travels.
It's all about turning stones into bread.
It's a power to transcend material limitations of phenomenons.
Alchemical principle to turn lead into gold.
But that's the premise of the whole, if in effect, reason.
Like, you're still here not exactly on knowledge yet.
You still can even say that that's what, in a way, reason is trying to achieve, to go beyond the limits, like to go through the limitations, to feed the hungry, to turn stones into breads.
But it's not just what is happening.
This story is not alone in what is happening.
Why I brought the word power?
Because in the moment when you imagine that you have a knowledge achieved by reason to turn stones into bread, it immediately creates a new power relationship.
The one who can feed, the one who can do it, the one who cannot.
And that story tells us a very interesting part of the still-reason part, which we often overlook.
There is no such thing as neutral reason.
Any reason is necessarily welded by whom.
And in an act of welding this reason, it becomes power.
And that's why knowledge necessarily becomes power.

**SPK_0:**
Very nice.
I mean, Machiavelli very specifically plays with the tension.
And when he advises the prince and he says, look, you're trapped.
On the one hand, you don't want to change anything.
Because any disequilibrium in your territory leads to some instability that can overthrow what you're doing.
And yet, you're surrounded by other princes.
And any one of those princes who chooses to take a bite from the apple has a chance of getting power, an asymmetric advantage, and you're his lunch.
So you and the other princes are playing the game, the dark forest game.
So we see this, right?
We see this trap.
That's step two.

**SPK_1:**
Effectively, there's a step two.

**SPK_0:**
There's a step two.
So first, I suppose what I'll do is I will confess and ground this in very experiential.
Some number of years ago, 10, 15, I can't remember.
I was having a conversation with my friend, Eric Weinstein.
He was in New York at the time.
And he was very frustrated.
With the fact that he could not get anyone to really attend to his physics.
He had a physics theory or even a meta-theory that implied across different domains like economics.
And he was very frustrated.
And so I counseled him in my Gnostic wisdom.
I said, you're going about this all wrong.
You need to move to Silicon Valley.
And I told him the story, from my point of view, of what happened with Newton.
Or how did science actually...
And he said, look, science did not actually get born on the basis of finding truth.
Science was born on the basis of accruing power to a certain class of people who are willing to be open to receive that power so they could win in a conflict with another class of people.
And because the alliance between scientists and merchants

**SPK_1:**
by means of technology...
Unholy alliance.

**SPK_0:**
Okay, unholy.
Precisely against the church and the king, right?
Achieved actual power success.
Then we live in the aftermath of that world.
And so if you would like to find a way to out-compete the adversary of those who control the current instantiation of that, whatever's going on with the relationship between political power and the academy, which I called the blue church later, you need to move to a place where there's a new...

**SPK_1:**
New power seed, effectively.

**SPK_0:**
A new seed of power, exactly.
And the technologists of Silicon Valley are always looking for more gradients of power.
And they will see the possibility.
And they can deploy resources.
They strategically have...
They have strategic capacity.
There's still a lot of strategic...
As Samuel Berger would say, they're live players.
At least there's a few.
There's a few.
And so that's the story.

**SPK_1:**
It is the story.

**SPK_0:**
That is the exact story.

**SPK_1:**
But the story is that, like, what we want to at the moment to say, well, it's just some bad use of knowledge or some bad use of power.
And the way I say it, notice how trick happens without us realizing it.
On a step one, we already completely separated knowledge from any kind of ethics.
And yet we say it's a bad use of knowledge.
It is a schizophrenic, Gnostic opposition we do with ourselves all the time.
Because the whole selling point and the whole argument against, let's say, historically the church was it was limiting speed and of technological advancement precisely on ethical reasons.
Like asking 20 times, are you sure it's worth doing it?
Or is it the way...
Because have you thought about, like, not all, but have you thought about these consequences?
Have you thought about this?
That's why we completely misunderstand the story of Galileo's.
We completely misunderstand the whole classical narrative of, you know, evil church oppressing the bright scientific minds pursuing truth.
Just in case, guys.
Not what historically happened.
It's a myth on its own.
And I just don't have really time to go into it, like in the historical detail.
But let me point this way.
The problem with Galileo's was not that he was claiming heliocentricity.
The point was general.
The conflict was that the church was very...
putting this ethical limitation.
It did legitimately put ethical limitation on pursuit of technological advancement.
Sometimes you can argue for good, sometimes argue for bad, but it's not what's important.
What is important in this story is that at least it had a point from which to argue about good and bad.

**SPK_0:**
Right.

**SPK_1:**
Whereas the whole principle move of reason is to liberate itself from good and bad.
There is no good and bad beyond the reason.
Reason is in itself good and bad.
Like more reason good, less reason bad.
Like that's the ethical structure it operates.
But then immediately you jump into conclusion because that's a tricky true relationship.
There is no reason without power.

**SPK_0:**
Oh, hold on.
Give me more.

**SPK_1:**
Well, simply, me knowing how to do something automatically gives me power to do it.
At least potential power.

**SPK_0:**
Yes, yes.
Nice.
Okay, so what we find is that there is both...
It is a two-edged sword.

**SPK_1:**
All necessary and always.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
If it didn't do that, then it would be irrelevant.

**SPK_1:**
Which they find out very quickly.

**SPK_0:**
And so therefore it does.
Okay, fair enough.
A lot of branches here.
What do we do?
I feel like we may want to spend a little bit of time on the plague.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
That's a really good place to do.

**SPK_0:**
And also, again, on this notion of like a downward slope.
You know, I guess it's sort of the eschaton at the bottom of this journey.

**SPK_1:**
Yes, there is an eschaton.
Yeah, that feels intense.
But let's start with the plague.
Let's just start with a simple example, just to have stats somewhere.
Because obviously, plague was a shock for...
Like, again, we recently experienced COVID.
Pretty bad.
Yeah.
But nothing can close what the medieval people experienced when the plague came.
In fact, this is where this unholy alliance between science and power emerged.
Because the only way to control the spread of epidemics was effectively to enforce a quarantine.
Quarantine is not...
Knowledge forcing is power.
You needed both.
You needed a line of soldiers standing around the city, killing everyone coming to and from the city, and creating effectively a quarantine zone.
And this, those who did it survived.
Those who didn't do, don't.
But that's where you can see this alliance.
Knowledge and power were visibly shown.
It's always the case, but it was kind of a revelatory moment that the two guys needed each other.
Like, one step.
Second step obviously came later with exploration.
Knowledge how to do a certain model of ship really visibly produce you quantum leap of available resources in form of gold, or spices, or anything else.
On the one hand, so it's for your internal power struggle.
Sure.
But also, and this is more interesting, external power struggle.
As later, most famous principle of British, British colonialism speaks, I am right and you are not.
I have machine gun, you do not.
Might makes right.
You can pretend you're still, and remember, connecting with the first, and all this while bettering the world.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.
Cause you always have to give that therapeutic piece, a piece.
And the, the...

**SPK_1:**
Improving the quality of life.

**SPK_0:**
The conscience must always be at least a little bit resolved.
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
We are not barbarians.
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Okay.
So let's see.
So we have, in some sense now we're actually doing diagnosis of the mechanics.
Yes.
And this is fine.
This is good to explicate because we're in the middle of the arc.
And we're part of the, part of the movements we're in.
The patient is open.
Let's talk about.
So we have a, we have a demoralization event, right?
We have a place where lived faith, right?
The, the, the medieval image.

**SPK_1:**
Very simple.
The, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the demoralization because you're talking about how God, if God allows this, at least he is not in this world anymore.
He might have created laws.
He might set up things in motion.
That basically at the birth of daze.
The birth of modern daze was closely connected to plague, to religious war, to a set of like other pretty catastrophic events in European history.
So, at least it made it very easy to believe.
Well, if he is, he doesn't care.

**SPK_0:**
And you can, you can feel like the embodied extremists.
Okay.

**SPK_1:**
someone with knowledge say, God is not here.

**SPK_0:**
Prince is here.
Well, no, I'm very specifically, let's say you have a godly Prince or a Prince who really, really is godly.
And you go to him and say, you're going to have to take your soldiers and surround that town and quarantine it and kill everybody who wants to go in and kill anybody who wants to go out.
And the Prince will say, but everyone in the city will, I'm leaving them to their death.
And you say, yes, but there is no alternative.
This is what must happen.
This is going to push a human being beyond the limits of human morality.
It is more than the heart can bear.
It is impossible.
And this is again, so we now have speed.

**SPK_1:**
We have scope.
We now have intensity.
It's very intense.
The faith of that

**SPK_0:**
godly Prince must have been broken.
Okay.
So now we're, we're now in the place where reason steps in and reason does actually step in.
Reason says, Hey, I solved a problem for you here.

**SPK_1:**
Here is some gum powder.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
Look, the people who didn't do it, they're just gone.
You sacrificed something profound, but now let me rationalize it.
If you hadn't done it, you would have lost.
We'll probably do some therapy over here and the flavor of whatever you need.
Maybe it's because you got richer.
Maybe it's because fill in the blank.
It doesn't matter.
Therapy is very easy as we will know.
Maybe you get to eat more mutton.
Um, and now we're beginning to, we've

**SPK_1:**
actually look at the art.

**SPK_0:**
You can look at the art.
You can look at a beautiful cathedral.
Exactly.
All these, all these things that can be put in place.
And so we're beginning to get a bit of a sense, right?
At the local level, you will run into some encounter and the encounter will, will, will overwhelm your capacity to be in relationship with wholeness.
Again, speed, scope, intensity.
Other faculties will step in.
And the principal thing that other faculties will do is they will try to heal the gap.
Try to resolve the problem on the basis of their own capacities.
And here's the thing.
Locally, they will probably succeed.
Yes.
Right.
They will succeed by creating a blind spot.
More importantly, they will succeed very visibly.

**SPK_1:**
Right.
Very intensely.

**SPK_0:**
Exactly.
But by virtue of creating a blind spot.
So they say salience, they will succeed saliently.
Yes.
Focus on the problem in front of you.
We're going to have to ignore all the downstream negative consequences of what's happening because that needs to be resolved.
So, you know, orient from, the disposition, the posture, the quality of relationship, the community of relevance towards that, which is focused towards salience.
This happens in war.
This is why I was, sorry, a little bit of a bridge, but maybe it's exactly right.
I read a book called the, I think it's called the Ethics of Beauty.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
It's a great book to read anybody, please.

**SPK_0:**
Like, and in it, one of the things that Patizis brings forth, and I'm, this is second order heresy, not heresy.
Hearsay.
Zero degree heresy, I hope.
In the context of a just war, the soldier is intrinsically out of communion.
Yes.
The point is not that he is out of communion.
There's no way around it.
The point is he can only stay out of communion for a limited period of time.
Meaning when you're in war, you are forced into this moment of salience.
You are having to focus on something right in front of you with significant intensity.
To say, to use our metaphor now, your left brain has to be activated.
All morality is now pushed to the back and there's a very simple focus.
Destroy that which is before me.
Which means you're out of communion.
And now there's a process of how do we come back into communion.
But when an entire group is brought out of communion, now you're on a trajectory.
Now you're flying willy nilly through what is ultimately a pre-Christian experience.
It is communion is shattered.
How do you come back into proper communion?
And this has an interesting point.
And it has a certain trajectory to it.
So the quality we're talking about is that the Gnostic heresy is like an ill-healed wound.

**SPK_1:**
Oh yeah.
An ill-healed wound, or just it's a, it's kind of a poison which has a very good numbing effect for something which, and it's a very slow, poison is slow, numbing effect is good.
Like really good and like, it's a numbing effect that even works, you can say generationally.
Like poison effect.
works generationally at first doesn't even like it wasn't you don't even understand what is truly happening because again historical example there is an interesting intermediate part like in this whole story between plague and the full-on modernity full-on enlightenment and effectively it's called christian stoicism it's effectively this you know this agape this love this faith like yeah it's important relevant but let's focus on our duty as a good citizen as a good ruler it is through duty we actualize us as being a christian let's run about it yeah the tricky part and that's like why it is inseparable there's an any knowledge it would be okay if you kept the who in play but you are precisely in the preliminary step removing the who from the picture that is the trick and yes again referencing the book uh ethics of beauty he writes about it that's the difference like what emerges like a tendency in this whole uh the war problem is that instead of accepting the tragedy of four and sharing it which is very important he talks a lot and that's behind the reason like in order six the banners are blessed it's not because killing is good it's because we are sharing the responsibility of the soldiers who are defending and dying for us so we are participating in it so it's and then we effectively coming be ideally we need to come be healed together but it's hard and it's based on different assumptions ontology it has a very different foundation elements which we already touched but what we can do instead we can do two things either we can say that it's not bad at all it's beyond evil and good it's just this it's reasonable it's powerful it's not about good and bad right right it's it's not personal it's not personal just business yes that's one of the tricks which is easy to happen and since we have an opportunity to do it and if i don't do it somebody else's does it right which

**SPK_0:**
reason rationalizes very effectively very effectively and the other false promises again

**SPK_1:**
or okay so let's remake the world in a way you don't even have to make such a choice ah very nice very nice the basket let's give everybody a basket yeah how to solve the problem of robbery let's give everybody enough very simple logical idea like on a reasonable rational level it doesn't work because it misses the core point but you can see how from the assumptions we are working it is the most necessary conclusion and what is the you already said the word technique behind it that's the knowledge it's the knowledge how it's the knowledge how to feed it's the knowledge how to to kill it's the knowledge how it's it's a know-how even like that's what it becomes

**SPK_0:**
oh so let's let's drill into this more i want i want to i want you to spend more time on like nature of knowledge and and what are like what are the trade-offs of the balance i have a very very good feel for reason and how reason does what it does and why and where spend more time on knowledge

**SPK_1:**
so i have uh well again knowledge is at least the way i use it in this series is effectively applied reason yeah knowledge is power this is knowledge is power yeah the trick is that's the trick is i think we pretend that it's a neutral power that this is not the power of whom it's just a power so it's just a raw force we do it's just a raw energy yeah but another book referencing if anybody wants to read technopoly postman writes a lot about it it's a lie there is no such thing as a neutral technology any technology actually carries an imprint of a will which created this technology by the fact that it creates an emergence it creates an asymmetry of relation between the ones who know how to use a technology and the one who doesn't know and it's a automatic asymmetrical power relationship so you are trading it's actually interesting thing i didn't think about it but you are trading organic asymmetry to inorganic asymmetry because we're so that's the thing notice how weird it is we're so offended with any organic asymmetry it's so unfair to us you can run plus i don't know how to run fast i'm a man somebody is a woman like people all these different kinds of natural symmetry deep inside see at least not as as to the extent i am agnostic it offends me there is something which is carrying offended but if but if it's a technical asymmetry i'm fine with it like that surely somebody knows how to go code and create things which control my life so i don't know how to cut but it's not a problem of course but how do you set a upPAW to somehow doing anti- behaviors and how do you set up off-pathass systems in addition to the contributors within the構 existence and form of your code for a good fine i don't feel any of this sort you know this is how it's interestingly pleasant because why because we pretend it's neutral remember in the previous conversation we had an author

**SPK_0:**
that pretends to be removed from the picture yes yes yes that's and so neutral it's neutral within which then also implies something like and therefore in principle you could have learned to code yes so it is your choice yes you chose yeah and that's games work that way yeah you play you you play the way you choose to play and it's on you you were not you did not choose how you were born no so that can be very unfair but you did choose what you studied so that's on you okay so you want more power gain more knowledge gain more knowledge and it's and by the way because unequal access to knowledge is unfair we'll make sure that we have equal access to knowledge so we're trying to so we have a couple of different pieces here we need to sort of again maybe tease apart one is is this notion of asymmetry um and as you say i think this is exactly right the essence of knowledge is asymmetry the whole point of knowledge is asymmetry i know how to dig a well you don't know how to do well prior to knowing how to dig a well i had a certain relationship with reality after knowing how to dig a well i have a qualitatively distinct relationship with reality that change is the point

**SPK_1:**
and it's real it's very real it's yes it is just to be clear i'm not saying it's not real and it is almost no this is very real

**SPK_0:**
this is very real and then our current world is the maybe the most real um okay so that's one the reason why i hammer on that is because this is the essence when we say knowledge we mean that we mean the deliberate intentional effective use of a variety of different human faculty to achieve an asymmetry in relationship to possibility yes a qualitative shift in in your capacity to act in the world two because knowledge is not intrinsically universal it also creates an asymmetry horizontally there are those who have it and those who do not by definition those who do not are living in a previous state of capacity in relationship to reality those who do are living in the current state of reality or in the state post knowledge okay okay three this is a different way of thinking about it but this has to do with the fact of schism these kinds of asymmetries are they break apart communion and they they break apart the ways that we have of maintaining wholeness of relationality with each other just a little

**SPK_1:**
bit soft on it and deep on it it creates it creates necessarily a possibility of community being broken apart here is a possibility yeah yeah fair enough yeah fair enough and the image

**SPK_0:**
the image i have is actually very a very i have is actually very a very simple one it's very fun so there's a thing that happens where i grew up where you get into a uh an inner tube do you know what this is it's like a the thing that's inside a tire okay a big a big torus filled with air usually black because it gets hot you get in the water we're all floating down the river with these in these inner tubes and it's very floating to stay together you link arms as you've now formed a flotilla something that looks like a wholeness then you hit rapids and you hit water that's moving faster differential shearing strengths are pushed against it at a certain point under under the right conditions the flotilla breaks apart that's what we're describing yeah right we are linked together in something like a wholeness by things bonds relationships that have a certain strength as we enter into knowledge the differential in terms of power in one direction and the differential in terms of asymmetry in another direction creates shearings and we're able to break apart the flotilla we're able to bring and under certain conditions these will break things apart okay so that's part of the kind of the natural philosophy of knowledge power and community oh so then we have an iteration on that yes this is the uh the liberal capitulation to pointing towards which is something like there is no pointing towards because that's the beauty like no no i mean i mean riding the energy of that okay yeah or or furling the sail against the winds of asymmetry this is your british right the british come with the straight face of look i've got machine guns you don't that's where that's how that's how this thing grounds out at the end right so liberalism kind of says look fuck it this is how it's going to be so you got a choice you're either going to be the guy who's on the right side of it or the guy is on the wrong side of it be on the right side of history be on the right side of history and how is this going to work because i'm going to sell you a bunch of bullshit on how the right side of history looks like you're not being able to do it you're not being able to do it you're not being able to do it on the front end of this thing i'm going to get on the front end of this thing more importantly

**SPK_1:**
back to the point of salvation what starts tricking here like i am very inclined like very inclined effectively to build a pretty good and easy chain i have this technology that's why i'm chosen that's why this technology came to me oh yes yes very important yeah very important why our society is better well because we produce machine gun it's self-evident it is and that's the civilization

**SPK_0:**
that's the whole white civilization is agnostic how could you not be superior this is the the evidence of superiority of civilization is the capacity to produce more stones into bread right to feed more people to provide good things to clean up rooms more effectively i have robots you don't have robots what is going on this is self-evident yes very nice and we do it all the time and the reason we almost can't even think without doing it yeah well

**SPK_1:**
again that's actually trickier because we can at least that's the neutrality part actually plays a little bit uh softening for an adversary because it does make us ask ethical question there is something in this idea of neutrality which is uncomfortable in effect to us yeah like

**SPK_0:**
oh yeah well we have we have to talk about the distinction between the the cities of cain and the ark of noah yes right because what's going to happen next is this is going to be oh well are you all loaded like basically are you are you rebuking knowledge qua knowledge that's a very difficult position to be in yes right what that means is you're saying i'm going to valorize complete and utter ignorance even language has to go away well no in fact we're saying not that what we're saying is that there's something that distinguishes the gnostic

**SPK_1:**
civilization from something else which we are in a search for naming just in case we are in a search for naming yeah but the difference is very clear and one is against the idea of wholeness the north arc is integrated in the whole ontology of reality yeah it's technology is here ethics axiology is here and ontology or communion is right here and that's no sark in the techno like techno world knowledge is just here it just is there is nothing above and there is nothing

**SPK_0:**
beyond it right babylon babble yeah why build the tower to the heavens to make a cell phone just

**SPK_1:**
to be clear really but ultimately because we can because we invented the bricks and mortars

**SPK_0:**
we can okay okay so this is so again we we have is something like the this this sort of this downward slide to degeneracy yeah in the first few steps it looks and feels awesome really good and in fact in some sense it is this is the problem there's nothing about not dying from the plague that is bad yes that's a really a good penicillin is nice it's a good thing and this is where the church has trouble you know if the church says look i've got really big picture high concept reasons why you shouldn't save your child from death you're gonna get a lot of people on the wrong side of that and you got somebody over here who says well i'm just gonna give them all penicillin fuck you somebody's gonna win somebody's gonna lose that fight and it's hard to win somebody's gonna lose that fight and it's hard to win somebody's gonna lose that fight it's hard to say by the way i would not even advise saying it because i don't think it's true but it's hard to say no let these children die in agony because 150 years from now the downward slope will have played out very negatively uh this is so interesting so are you familiar with paul king's north and you're familiar with the with the challenge that he's issued and we're again but remind those people so so he is he is very specifically said that the word christian and the word civilization cannot be put together and i now tend to agree with him yes except he's caught in the false dichotomy yeah there is something else there's a third term we are trinitarians we are not dualists there's a third term that can be brought into this equation that is this conversation not equating this conversation that contains christian and contains things like knowledge and contains things like reason and contains things like technology and other words that we'll be describing later that is not civilization and does not fall into any of these um uh downward spirals okay we already mentioned it before and

**SPK_1:**
this question will keep shining and shining and shining again the key question is the question who nice because uh that's the whole trick of knowledge like it does create a power symmetry objectively and it's not and it's not neutral in that sense but it also creates a choice it also really creates a choice you can dig well to save people you can dig well to make profit it is choice but to face this choice you cannot do it if you keep it but at least empirically if you keep technology free from ethics you can't even pose this question you can as i said you can say it's good or bad use of technology but the only good or way the good or bad use of technology is its efficiency there is no other good or bad characteristics in terms of technology and instinct to any technology sorry good machine girl skills 100 people bad machine girl skills no one that's what good or bad any technology is good or bad is a heart again so the problem with civilization it's built upon taking heart out of the picture how to call a community like basically it is a neutral i mean we know how it's called effectively you are talking about something i like neutral new jerusalem but not through the means of technology basically again it's completely opposite causality technology might come it might come handy but it doesn't

**SPK_0:**
come first so it's interesting because it seems like the reality is the exact opposite of the instinct that you mentioned earlier in terms of the organic and the inorganic here's what i mean my uncle was a very large man six foot nine three hundred and something pounds six foot nine three hundred and something pounds and he was always big what that meant was that he cultivated an intrinsic ethics he had to learn how to be careful he had to learn how to control his temper he learned very early that if he didn't do that bad things would happen and there was something about the speed of development and the context of development and even the nature of his his metabolism in his heart where he cultivated that i'm not saying it's necessary but the point is there's a coupling here now um let's just say me i did not go through that i was never that kind of a person i could have a gun without developing any ethical capacity i could have access to power bond on the basis of knowledge the inorganic is strictly decoupled from any process that actually binds the power that you build or you you have access to from anything that would connect that power into a fully integrated system that would enable that power to be wielded properly

**SPK_1:**
more importantly the very attempt to do it is considered evil yes and stupid simultaneously yes because it decreases power yeah that is like on the first step it does decrease power right legitimately or like speed again the speed the intensity like it does decrease it like right

**SPK_0:**
so so we here we're here sitting on the thing known as the uh the multi-polar trap or the moloch problem right depending on which culture you're from i kind of like the moloch one now because it obviously invokes what i now recognize is an actual demon no but yeah it's good to

**SPK_1:**
give sense in all the names uh because it is multi-polar it is a good way of putting it and um there is another hidden element here why no knowledge is power to do what and that's this is i think the trickiest part in it because it is about heart and before we pretend it too hard not to play but knowledge is a power to have something without being something to have something with a simple example running i can't move with the speed of a cheetah with a car i can i'm not a cheater but i want the quality of cheetah i take this quality separate it and get it and it's always a quick part yeah in fact

**SPK_0:**
somebody recently said something that that i found to be intriguing and confusing which is that the whole point of technology is to give us power without the expenditure of energy

**SPK_1:**
some perpetual engine something like that right so

**SPK_0:**
for me to achieve the ability to run fast as an organic being i would have to do something like practice running fast for a long time and still be limited not faster than a cheat and never as fast as a cheetah well maybe you've seen both for a brief moment but in any event and the point literally the point of technology is to get me that without expending that energy by the way which is really interesting because i also get the other side i'm going to push the energy into the blind spot i'm going to push the energy into the blind spot i'm going to push the energy into the blind space i'm actually expending probably many many orders of magnitude more energy just not technically your energy that's my energy yeah

**SPK_1:**
oh that's good like literally like kilocalories like you know fuel it's the whole idea of fuel i'm expending not my energy i'm making a sacrifice well this is an interesting topic i am yeah like strong i pretends it's just again so maybe that's kind of one of our topic of our conversations is as if maybe the point of knowledge it's just it's just this i love it so knowledge is power

**SPK_0:**
power corrupts absolute power corrupts absolutely absolute knowledge corrupts absolutely and we see

**SPK_1:**
it playing all the time because then you have another different like that's a tricky part coming into play one thing it's about let's say moving running etc so it is important but it is heavy but what about if a human is a part of technology of course yeah very nice how can i get this beautiful girl without being chosen by this beautiful girl that starts playing very interesting immediately because it is also knowledge and you have a and just in case i'm not speaking it even as a theory you know what is the size of a market for pickup classes in any developed country i don't even want to know no no but i don't know either but a lot i know like people basically making millions and billions in it but what i say it's exactly the same pattern you can't get this i will teach you how i will give you the knowledge how to get this without humbling yourself actualizing yourself and reaching the point where it will get to you you don't need to do it skip it skip the line not even the line change rewrite the world rewrite the code change the like introduce like it's all place in this story and the problem is we start with organic we start with nature but we end up with hearts the problem with technology i think and i didn't want to talk about it actually but i i want to talk about it that it has its inherent tendency being left to its alone to see everything as a object it has an intrinsic tendency to replace any subject to subject relationship to object to subject to object but in fact object to object relationship and it is it alone that's a thing alone it cannot escape it yeah it's built into it so is there a word or do we actually need to

**SPK_0:**
coin a word that represents knowledge that is not

**SPK_1:**
intrinsically separating or separated i honestly think the way in a certain way of understanding i

**SPK_0:**
think art is way better word ah yes you mean the sense of like uh the fine arts no no just

**SPK_1:**
like this whole principle because and this is maybe not the best word but i've just seen from experience when you see a good craftsman working on a chair you see that the better the craft craftsman is even with this inorganic matter he acts as if it is a life yes doesn't treat it as an object it's a dialogue so and hint hint there is also a certain the story is a spirit between somebody anyway but that's the story that's i think is an opposite and that's what it is integrated like so but on a human level we use it even sometimes the art of raising three children yeah the technique of raising children sounds nice dystopian yeah yeah yeah very good the art of raising children doesn't sound so at least like well maybe my feeling of english is not perfect but in my uh extremely hackneyed and almost certainly

**SPK_0:**
heretical so therefore watch out uh theology uh i connect the notion of art to beauty and beauty to the way that god communicates in the most basic fundamental way that god communicates

**SPK_1:**
in the most basic fundamental way at least in our language i think that's what we yes and so a saint

**SPK_0:**
is first an artist um but very particular artist and we'll again talk it's not an artist in a

**SPK_1:**
let's say romantic way of this word because that's very interesting like what's the meaning of it and it's interesting the topic of art keeps coming into play because it it it is relative but yes the antidote to technology is art in a broad sense and it is very interesting even like in our language we can let's say liberal arts they are not arts i'm sorry like it's effectively technology it's a marketing technology not liberal arts what it is like and that's the thing the more we have technology the more we technologize our society the less place it is for truly art like even like on a formal like institutional level why do i need a department of

**SPK_0:**
classical of classical literature we have the same we have the same downward slide so in step one what do we have in step two we have the notion of all life properly is art yes all proper life is art any expression of life that is truly connected and truly guided is art step two some expressions of life that have particular characteristics like painting and dancing and singing those are art three particular artifacts the actual painting is art not the process of painting is art four at the end of the day it's really marketing right it's just a downward slope it'll end up there every time and so there's something about this downward slope that has to do with disconnectedness right there's an exit object like ultimately it ends like

**SPK_1:**
removing the who and on each step you are removing the who more and more

**SPK_0:**
so let's hit the the name of who or who because what popped into my head then was also the notion of communion because the way we operate the level of who oh this is so good okay so who is who is talking right now you invited me into this with a very powerful thing which was that you had noticed that monologue for lack of a better word no longer worked so you said this needs to be done in the process of dialogue or in fact dialogos to use verveke's term because dialogos is the process of the formation of a who uh pageau right there is a spirit here the who is the spirit that includes us and that we participate in this is the antinomy of them which is therefore what you are restored to that person right to the persony and you

**SPK_1:**
choose to do whatever you want with it you can choose to do whatever you want with it but not just the body control you can do whatever you want with it when you want with it middle species on this thing you choose with or without a single thought to address it you can decide to Beit be an alternative that this effectively an alternative but back to the optimist side any good true and beautiful thing you ever experienced in your life is of this nature nothing good came from technique even the good things you came from technique came from you treating technique as an art for example you can see it like i remember myself sorry like it's actually interesting with computers like me getting my first computer i was excited but not because of power because it was a mystery a miracle a wonder i didn't treat this machine as a object like i didn't know that i didn't do it but in fact i was treating it as something alive something curious something that wants to meet me something that i want to engage in a weird form of relationship dance etc etc and that's why i had joy in this moment i buy a new phone i don't feel

**SPK_0:**
but oh oh by the way and they try to give you back a simulacrum of that feeling you which is like that sense of allurement or the sense of glamour they turn this feeling into technology into technique and through marketing exactly okay so so we have the strip mining of the soul is a known problematic of this downward spiral but we're also talking about and this is important there's there's a good there's a good message there is good news and the good news is actually in some sense very practical there is a way and that way has names like you said art there are ways for us to come into proper communion with each other i can like it's a realist we're probably going to resuscitate that we're doing good work on symbol i can is probably later today or tomorrow but this notion of centering moving from from what and how to who but noticing that when we heal who the idea of individual completely evaporates and that's the

**SPK_1:**
price we don't want to pay for several reasons which we can actually talk about later because our next topic is exactly about trust you
