
**SPK_0:**
All right.
So we've been exploring the question of the Gnostic civilization, which off camera I've suggested I'm going to start calling the Gnostic sleight of hand and the ways in which we find ourselves rather tremendously veiled by the sleight of hand and living in that world.
And yet that which is self-evident nonetheless needs to be revealed.
We've walked through a little bit of this.
You've put together a natural history or a bit of a diagnosis.
One element is having to do with the nature of reason, the elevation of reason, what it means when we center ourselves on reason, we try to live by and through reason, when we try to build our entire world on the basis of reason and how this is both a part of and produces an inevitable slide deeper and deeper into the Gnostic civilization.
And then we talk about knowledge and power and the notion that knowledge is power.
And for example, the notion that there are built-in asymmetries intrinsic to who has and who does not have knowledge and intrinsic asymmetries to the very nature of knowledge.
The point of knowledge is to have access to a higher degree of power in relationship with something, perhaps even just the world.
And if I want to produce fire and I have knowledge of how to produce fire, I now have an asymmetry vis-a-vis the world.
And of course, if I have fire and you don't have fire.
All right, I have asymmetry vis-a-vis you.
And this also has, is a piece of the element, a piece of the hologram, I suppose, of the Gnostic.
And then the next one we talked about was the deal and trust.
And we actually made a little bit of a distinction.
We actually spread things out.
We had this notion of there's trust here and there's the deal here.
And in between, there's this really interesting illusory space called the fair deal.
And we noticed that if we're grounded, actually grounded in trust, then the concept of the fair deal has a reality to it.
But what happens is, is that we unground ourselves in trust and we think that we can actually engage in the fair deal, which makes us the more on...

**SPK_1:**
For a reason.
For a reason, yes.

**SPK_0:**
And so now we find ourselves at the threshold of the next topic.
Being mindful that they're all referential.
You can start anywhere and end up anywhere.
They all point in the same direction.

**SPK_1:**
In itself, I think, because we didn't plan it, like even when I was writing it, like...
And yes, guilty.
If you have any complaints about titles, my fault, but we never had it in my head that it will be this way.
But just keep an eye that you can start in any point and move in any point with the topics of our conversation and they will make sense because it is a circle and Gnosticism by definition is a circle and we will dive deeper into it.
But yeah, so the topic of this, like the center, like, oh, let's say the spotlight, maybe that's the best way.
Of saying what we are doing, like it's the same object, but different spotlights is the question of self, because we've been hinting at it that there is always who there must be always who in the picture, but our honest Gnostic fellow civilization men can say, well, we do have a question of who, like we do have an answer to the question of who, and I agree, they do, we do.
But it's a very particular answer.
It's a very sleight of hands answer as well.
This who is will.
So the title of this episode is will as self or will equals self.
And truth be told, this might be the most beaten up topic, at least in the context of people we talk and communicate with and our friends with, because that became effectively the plague of the whole, let's say, the online debates for the last, let's say, 10, 15 years, especially that, like, the whole question, what does it mean to be, that's a problem of self.
Because if you have this unbounded self-expression, there must be some objective limits to it.
And like, it's not enough just to say you are something, you must actually be this something.
And so on and so forth.
We all know this popular debates and we all know these popular examples, like in going to this question of gender, the question of sex, the question of just any form of identity.
But let's jump just to the highest, why these questions happen.
And they do happen precisely because within the Gnostic tradition, with world being a prison.
Right.
but knowledge being power and reason being salvation, some agent is still necessary.
But this agent, by the previous presuppositions, has to be, in fact, immaterial.
It has to be a disembodied agent, and it has to be an immaterial agent.
And the closest thing to this agency is effectively the famous Descartes, spirit in the machine.
So it's just the spirit, or to be more precise, how we see the spirit, and it is the will of the spirit.
So that's why self has to become will.
And this will can save the world through reason, this will can gain power through knowledge, this will can cut deals.
But it's always ultimately about just the will part.
Because everything else, and that's why a deal is important, everything, any external limitation, of this will cut not through a deal is a tyranny.
Aha.

**SPK_0:**
So what I think I heard you say, and I'm trying to follow the logic, is that because in some sense the essence of the Gnostic presupposition, like the unconscious presupposition, is the complete corruption of the world, and also the capacity to escape that on the basis of this other thing, the spirit, that which is the agent, the agent of salvation must be entirely spirit and zero percent body.
And so in seeking that or finding it, they find the will, which is pure agency in some sense, conceptually it is agency completely disembodied, it is pure agency.
Okay.
And then the next move is that ultimately everything becomes negotiations between wills.
Okay.

**SPK_1:**
That's why consent becomes the key point.
Like the one, the word which starts coming into play, ultimately the real question is not whether it's good or bad, whether it's true or false, whether do you consent to this?
So basically do our wills reach an agreement about it?
We've been already, because there are slides of hints and inherent lies within presuppositions, but we can see how it's naturally follows without resistance from one into another.
And almost like you have to go down this road, because if you imply trust as a part of reality, then will cannot be judged.
You are the only self.
There must be other elements in it.
Then immediately you end up in relationships and your relations, yourself, immediately tricky and to an extent terrifyingly starts belonging not exclusively to you.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
And it is a very terrifying moment for agnostic.
Truth be told, it is like in the heart, there is a lot of fear, which we'll go down to.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
Okay.
So let me, if we think of this notion of the Gnostic slide, slide of hand, then we try to slow it down.
Like we're going to film it.
We're going to slow it down because he's an excellent stage magician.
The first thing of the Gnostic move is to either separate you from wholeness or take advantage of moments where you have been separated from wholeness.
Okay.
This is when you are vulnerable to the Gnostic slide of hand.
If you, if you are fully in contact and connection, if your faith is strong, then you're not vulnerable to the Gnostic slide of hand, but you can become.
Unvulnerable.

**SPK_1:**
Suffering.
Because of stress.

**SPK_0:**
Suffering is a, is sort of the common, the common experience.
And some of it might be say trickery, like lies, lots of lies, very careful lies, particular lies, a little bit of confusion, a little bit of disorientation, then attack or hit.
The hit then has to do this, this shift, this flip.
We have to take away the real thing and we have to insert in its place something, which is a simulacrum.
But I want to, I want to go into more detail on that because then the simulacrum takes advantage.
You used the example of a, was it Aaron Nails?

**SPK_1:**
Aaron Nails.
Aaron Nails,

**SPK_0:**
who talked about the, the difference between an Emerald and a piece of, of green glass, that green glass is decidedly not an Emerald, but there are ways that you can fabricate the green glass.
So that it actually looks more Emeraldy than the Emerald to an eye that lacks proper discernment.
And so to a soul that lacks proper discernment, the Gnostic slide of hand takes away the real thing.
In this case, the real self, and gives back something, which is able to reconstitute many of the things that are part of the real self adequately to the faculties of the one who's now being deceived and give some of those back in a way that is more salient, more intense.
So that the foregrounding of those intense parts to say, for example, reason, and by the way, fear, right?
Fear as a, as a sense fear, this is probably exactly right.
Make someone a little bit afraid and then give them something that fear can, can perceive more clearly than peace can perceive.
And so fear grasps at that.
And now you've begun to get somebody deeper and deeper into the Gnostic trap.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, I kind of want to stay on fear a little bit because fear has an interesting relationship with trust in exactly the fashion you're talking about.
On the one hand, trust defeats fear.
But on the other hand, fear still stays within the trust.
Just it stays as a possibility.
A logical possibility, not experiential possibility.
If you let this logical possibility become experiential, even in your thought, fear is gone.
Like the moment you start thinking, can I actually trust him?
It means that the trust is gone.
Right.
But logically in a moment of trust, there is always fear.
Easy.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
Somewhere there right behind the corner.
Right.
So what Gnostic exactly sleight of hand is like take the real thing.
What is the real thing that there is in any trust?
There is vulnerability.
You can't move vulnerability aside of trust.
If you want to reach safety, trust is not the way.
Trust doesn't create safety as this perfect sterility or absence or lack of hurtful probabilities.
Right.
It transforms it, but it doesn't remove them.
And Gnostic sleight of hand is instead of transformation or repentance or metanoia removes them.
You notice how it's, it's very tricky.
Yeah,

**SPK_0:**
very tricky.
And so what it does is it gives you back safety.
Yes.
Or at least it gives you back two things.

**SPK_1:**
It claims to give.
Right.

**SPK_0:**
You can say, it gives you back something that it can claim to be safety.
And it gives you back the notion that safety is the thing that you've been looking for in the first place, which is very important.
It does both moves because it has to be able to continue to keep you confused.
And so then I'm imagining the world of will as self.
And it's interesting because you have this notion that now one of the implications of the world as will as self is that we are intrinsically independent.
Yes, we are.
There were a multiplicity of independent wills.
And now, okay, we have the problem.
How do we come back into relationship?
Right?
We have to, there's no way around it.
And then, of course, we also yearn to.
So we both have to and yearn to.
And so it gives us the deal.

**SPK_1:**
It gives us the deal.

**SPK_0:**
Okay, you want to come into relationship.
You have the way of forming various forms of deals.

**SPK_1:**
And sometimes it's even reuses good words.
Again, reinterpret like respect, like respect.
There is a good meaning behind respect, but there is also Gnostic meaning behind respect.
And in Gnostic meaning, respect is to your will ultimately to your agency.
It's limited to your agency.
I respect you as agency.
I don't respect you actually as a whole.
Like that's an interesting part.
I have to respect you exclusively as will, but I say that I respect.
Nice.

**SPK_0:**
And so this tells me also that, we had spoken earlier about the idea of one creates an idol by taking the part as the whole.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
And we can be, I think a little bit more precise, which is if I imagine the geometry of a sphere as the geometry of a symmetrical, all I have to do is make it non-symmetric.
I just have to take apart and pull it into the foreground.
I don't have to separate it completely.
In fact, in some sense, I can't ever really do that.
But the important thing is once I move it out of actual wholeness, once I, make some part the foregrounded element.
And of course, now everything begins to orbit around that.
I've now created this idea, idol.

**SPK_1:**
Absolutely.
And another thing which idol is doing in that sense, why, like why again on another side, why it is appealing to us, because I think which important is to recognize the certain, again, I think one of the ways, if anything is the only way to face Gnosticism, I won't even want to say fight Gnosticism because I'm not into combative in the, in the modern meaning of this word, but face it is to admit this kernels of truth.
It takes and find a better way to deal with them.
So what I mean, as I mentioned before, there is fear and vulnerability involved in trust.
You can't run away from it.
If anybody wants to, let's say, be anti Gnostic, but saying, well, there is no actual fear.
There is no actual vulnerability.
It won't never work.
It will never work a light.
And so the modern version of this argument would be just become an entrepreneur for some person, from, let's say, I don't know, a broken neighborhood, like saying to them, something like this, that's effectively what saying, or just saying to some person from a broken house.
So, you know, just, you know, just deal with it or something like doesn't work because that's the thing you are denying this kernel of truth, which Gnosticism will build upon.
So what is another kernel of truth in this whole will idea?
Well, one thing we need to be brave to face is that like in any name or in any identity, there is a tyrannical, element.
There is a yoke, one can say, and an identity by making you somebody, but you by being you automatically are not you.
And this is inescapable.
You can say that for a prideful soul, it feels like a tyrannical oppression.
It is experienced as tyrannical oppression.
Well, whether this, whether it's tyrannical oppression as a name is not true name of this phenomenon, the fact of this, this limit and the fact of this confinement is true.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah,

**SPK_1:**
absolutely true.

**SPK_0:**
That is.
Yes, quite.
So we can, I tend to, well, maybe we should double down on the, on the, on the day, the description, but I find this obvious, but let me sort of bring some to the foreground.
So we have, for example, the people who are idolaters of Liberty.
Okay.
And Libertarians are self about idolaters of Liberty, but there are many people who are idolaters of Liberty.
And the thing that I noticed when I encounter such people is that there's a sense of adolescence, a sense of lack of maturity, because they perceive the notion of constraint, the way that you perceive constraint from an illegitimate authority.

**SPK_1:**
But the world is broken.
There is no legitimate authority.
This is,

**SPK_0:**
well, it's, it's in some sense, this is the world.
Remember, we were many generations down the sleight of hand.
So the experience is, in fact, the world is broken and there is no illegitimate authority in the sense.
That I have never experienced one.
And so it's easy for me to fall into the, into the trap of believing that that's just how it is.
There is no legitimate authority other than my own will and therefore Liberty.
But of course the problem is that now I'm sort of four layers down the confusion and there is legitimate authority and being willing to actually accept the reality of legitimate authority and then entering into the proper relationship, which is in fact called obedience, which immediately raises the hackles of somebody who's.
Either been inveigled or has learned on the basis of being in a dysfunctional relationship with the Gnostic civilization.
But that is part of the cure, part of the reality.
Same thing with fear.
So the way I, it's almost like I remember in Lord of the Rings, the return of the king.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
One of the things the king does is he puts things back in their proper place.
Honorably fear has an honorable place.
What was the other one?
We dealt with you that reason reason has an honorable place.
The technocrat or the person who's currently occupying the role of technocrat has an honorable place.
The technocrat is usurping.
They're not.
They're not in their honorable place.
And that's the problem.
But if we can take that person, we can take reason, we can take fear and put them in their proper place in a proper role in a proper identity, which includes things like obedience.
Then we actually have restored to health and wholeness.

**SPK_1:**
But prayer prayer supposition.
We can do by will alone.

**SPK_0:**
No, quite.
Quite right.
Very nice.
And this so this is then the the orthogonal part of the sleight of hand.
So I was imagining in the vision of this notion of moving the the self out of symmetry and having something foregrounded.
The next thing you do is you present that asymmetric foregrounded element as the center.
Yes.
And then everything has to orbit it.
Yes.
So how do we solve the problem of rationality?
Well, we're going to have to use reason more reason will probably be the way we solve the problem of rationality.
How do we solve the problem of will?
More will will probably solve the problem of will.
Right?
So yes,

**SPK_1:**
it's literal definition.
Like let's double down.
But that's a weird part.
Like didn't think about it before.
Explain it.
But now I actually see you have to double down.
It's not like even you choose to double down.
If you don't check the premise, you have to double down.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
And and because we have this this this notion that will maybe what I'll do is instead of using will I'll use reason.
They have the problem of will I use reason because I don't know that it's another name for the same thing.
That's important.
I can do the sleight of hand.
Involves having seven or eight things that are the same thing or take you to the same location.
So I can do a little shift.
You know what?
You're right.
Doubling down on will that seems like a really weird thing.
How about we use how about we make a deal?
How about we use knowledge?
How about we use a reason?
Like I've got a lot of possibilities.
And if you aren't aware of the fact that these are all different faces of the same.
Was it Shugoth?
So the image?
Yeah.
Then you're you'll be even you'll be tricked by that too.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
And so I think that's a nice sense of the sleight of hand.
And again, the Faces of the sleight of hand.
They are so foundational for the civilization and maybe to the West even slightly more particular just because in a way you've been longest into it, but it starts with nominalism.
It moves into will alone and then face alone and all of this kind of kind of things.
Then it moves into the Enlightenment, which effectively is the same because it says about reason.
But if you're looking into like actual writings of Enlightenment philosophers, they're talking about wills, the will of the people, the general will.
The general will is the sum of the individual's wills.
But who represents this in general will?
Well, the perfect will Fuhrer effectively.
Sorry, effectively Fuhrer was way before 20th century.
Effectively, Rousseau already writes about the need of a Fuhrer.
Okay, it can be party at first, but then you go deep into any party structure.
And for some reason within a party, you need to have internal party and within internal party, you need to have somebody else and somebody else.
So you can't even run from the question of authority, but you pretend you can replace it through will alone.
And this soft, soft lie for a prideful heart that you chose it.
It's not important.
In effect, it is chosen.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.
So I kind of feel like I want to do just some work on.
Let's take this.
Let's take this guy apart.
Okay, so there's at least three things that I see happen.
One is this doubling down, which I'm going to use the technical term hypertrophication.
Okay, and the image that I want you to have is of one of these like Mr.
Universe bodybuilders.
Okay, and it is it is proper.
To exercise.
It is proper to have a physique.
It is proper to be healthy.
As you take that and turn into an idol, you hypertrophy and they do so visibly and you can see it, but that's hypertrophication.
Now the the opposite of that is this if you have centered say will or reason or both as the center of reality, you've made it an idol.
You will hypertrophy your reason you will hypertrophy your will.
Yes.
Now this creates a real problem because other aspects of self are in fact actually underdeveloped.
So now you properly really actually do fear being called upon to use those other aspects of self because you're accurate.
They are weak in comparison to the level of what they're supposed to hold.

**SPK_1:**
Gosh, and that's why you end up with this paradox.
Sorry.
That's so perfect.
Like our modern state you have very smart people incapable of action and sorry, like people insane people capable of a lot of action.

**SPK_0:**
Yes, right.
And so we have.
At least two traps, but maybe three trap number one is because you have hypertrophied certain faculties.
You have a tendency to just use those faculties to the entire Gnostic system fits together in pieces.
So that your tendency will be to be as soon as you pick up a tool.
As soon as you enter into relationship with that civilization, it will bring you was at first it will work.
It will work.
That's right.
And you and you've been trained that way.
Think about what happens to a kid in school.
This is we can actually be very concrete.
So a child somewhere around first to third grade is when you start to really see the shift begin to occur.
They are trained that they are supposed to behave like what I call a mediocre machine.
We can use math as a simple example.
I'm training a child to become a relatively mediocre calculator.

**SPK_1:**
Not good.
Not bad.

**SPK_0:**
Just in some sense adequate.
Now, by the way, there's two to at least two or three points.
One is there's some utility in being able to be a calculator.
These there used to be more importantly.
Learning how to be that kind of thing is a primary piece of the story.
And then of course, you want to be able to play a role in society.
Okay.
Well that comes from both sides of the sword.
So as the child begins to have a basic sense, not necessarily consciously, but an experiential embodied actually an embodied experience that thinking is simple pattern recognition among a relatively narrow portfolio of possible environments.
And then a.
Causal relationship between an input pattern and an output pattern, right?
Which is computations.
You can also think of as like a vending machine.
And I see an image.
I pull the appropriate lever.
The right thing comes out.
They begin to identify that as thinking per se.
They are now beginning getting further and further away from the actual faculty of thinking.
And then they finally get lost and they lose track of the difference and they begin to begin intuitively thinking is still part of us because we are still humans.
But we are afraid to even begin to try to move toward the real thing because we're terrible at it.
And the society in which we operate.

**SPK_1:**
Reinforces the fake thing.
Kind of disencourages it.
Let me put it this way.

**SPK_0:**
Yes, sometimes quite violently actually.
And will tend to reward you if you get if you hypertrophy these faculties.
So this complex like it's the Gnostic industrial complex.
They all work together very, very tightly.

**SPK_1:**
And they're all interconnected.
That's why it's very hard to start on pinning it without seeing the picture as a whole and notice.
Will doesn't require seeing a whole like in a way because it's pretty narrow.
Like I don't need to see a whole picture for my will to act.
If anything in this world again in this reason will opposition the more whole of a picture I see the less I'm capable of acting.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.
Quite true.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, because there is an infinite amount of complications like which are starting happening and like you can see the most close examples of state bureaucracy.
Parallelage effectively what we are witnessing right now.
Anybody you talk to agrees.
Well, there are insolvable problems.
We don't know how to solve them.
Like we cannot solve them because it's just too complex.
But basically to solve it.
We need to actually exercise our will but we actually don't want to exercise it in a way the way we want because it means caring responsibility.
Yes, man.

**SPK_0:**
This is great.

**SPK_1:**
So they're not because another tricky part of reason notice is like it in Gnostic way reason is kind of absolving you of any responsibility.

**SPK_0:**
See more of that.

**SPK_1:**
Well, it's just calculation.
It's utilitarian.
Ah, right.

**SPK_0:**
It's just reasonable.

**SPK_1:**
It's good to do.
I'm Faust Mephistopheles.
You know the second book he's building this wonderful Canal systems to the common betterment, but there is this house of two old people standing in his way.
Well reason tells me I kind of need to remove it like or this wonderful Highway and there is a small Shack like I need to cut kind of deal with them at first.
But if they are really unwilling.
Well, it's not really my ethical choice to do anything bad against them.
Well, I just have to so the reason has a huge idea of absolving and this has to do that notion of also the we haven't brought it up recently the notion of the objective.

**SPK_0:**
Yes, like well, it's not me.
It's objective reality.
Yeah, come look if they are not able to perceive objective reality properly then that's kind of on them.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, it is kind of on them.
But that's a tricky part because ultimately if you go down this way, no ethical system can function.
In both neither reason nor will because sorry if will is self then Nietzsche is correct.
That's my favorite example.
I bring to my at his debates like sorry guys.
Why are you speaking about any morality?
I'm sorry, like guys at least be honest.
Like I can tell many things about Nietzsche, but at least he was honest like if will is self the only thing is matter is my will it is necessary for it to be the case.
Yeah, like I can maybe not to do something against you.
But I don't there is no have to and there can now and there can be no have to like in principle necessary.
There is necessarily because as long as there is any have to then my will is limited and it's necessarily not just about my will.
Right?

**SPK_0:**
Nice.
That's logical.
Very clean.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
Yeah, again logic is useful.
But the problem is like in Gnostics system and just run it's keep starts running into circle in a trap.
So you can do this but then what to do and then you ultimately have to end up as most.
Gnostic experiences having to contradict to reposition simultaneous time.
Yes, my favorite fun is believe in science, but which is true symbolically, but it is really funny and but in sense like in the wheel itself it is as a joke.
Like as there is a Russian philosopher Soloviev who himself had a lot of Gnostic.
Let's say her tendencies but some but one of his lines is beautiful is like a man is a descendant.
Of a vape.
So let's be kind to each other.
It's a joke.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.

**SPK_1:**
Because he was showing the absurdity of this complaint.

**SPK_0:**
Okay.
So let's do this.
No, let's do this.
Okay.
If will is not self or if will is not the whole of self.

**SPK_1:**
Will is not the whole.

**SPK_0:**
What is self?

**SPK_1:**
The unity of will, reason, body, soul, spirit, the unity of many things.
If I had to speak in theology.
But in practice, it would mean that yourself is a kinder.
You can say that the huge part of visit the relation relationships and the I know you can go deep into it and I want to encourage you to go deep into the whole relationship thing.
But it is between you and others and it's between the spirits which emerge when you and are the meat and it's all of this and it's not even a some even some doesn't give it justice.
It's some principal new quality, right?

**SPK_0:**
We'll have you have a fractal descent.
It's a mystery at every level.
Yes.
And in some sense you can say that but also you can look apophatically of all the elements but the key elements the things that keep coming up is this notion of a relationship and this notion of wholeness that as relationships become unities and the continual progression of an extension.
And so in some sense yourself has continuity of contact with the whole.
And in.
Some sense yourself is distinct from the whole and that paradox is perfect.

**SPK_1:**
It is a perfect paradox.
So in one sense and that's why and we it will come later.
But like in Dostoevsky you have this everyone is responsible and everyone is guilty for each other like or something along this line.
So we in fact one and sell everyone and one is the same thing in a way not in a like not in a Buddhist way.
Yeah, but in a paradoxical.
Yes, it is.
And then the whole question of cells flies out.
Oh, that's coming back to the point.
It's a tyranny and there is a there is a real there is a lot of oppression question marks but technically I guess you can under certain circumstances even causes I don't like this word oppression but like some limit is there is a certain limit to it.
There is a certain.
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
So is now the time to talk about postmodernism?

**SPK_1:**
Well postmodernism is just all predicated on this.
It's just we can.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, this is you mentioned it before we started talking that you were going to bring it up.
I don't want to put it in the wrong spot, but it seems like this might be a good spot.

**SPK_1:**
It is general as a sport of postmodernism.
That's why it's prize itself not on paradox, but absurdity and claims.
That's all.
It's what we can have.
But again to me is a postmodernism was already answered by Nietzsche.
I'm sorry.
Like if you have like the postmodernism use and sorry, Ubermensch in point of fact.

**SPK_0:**
So and I guess the thing that I'm noticing is that the has to say what was the phrase the something is due the bill is due the bill is due.
So.
We have now come far enough along the unfolding of the natural consequences of the reality of postmodernism that we are seeing everywhere.

**SPK_1:**
This this no unity can be called.

**SPK_0:**
No unity can hold together right there.
There is no actual way for values to presence themselves such that will must subordinate properly.

**SPK_1:**
This can maybe out of fear for now, but it doesn't have to increasingly it becomes obvious.

**SPK_0:**
It's just power, right?
Increasing.
It's increasingly obvious and increasingly boldly obvious.
It's just probably postmodernists have been saying that for quite some time.
But now it's not something that's kind of lives within a small number of turtleneck wearing nerds at Yale.
It's actually increasingly just an unconscious obviousness.

**SPK_1:**
But also notice this or it's completely as a trick of story about this story also coming to cause it and the fact that it's coming together simultaneously already brought it up in a Gnostic world.
There is no legitimate power.
So it's not just power.
It's a legitimate power, but it's even deeper level behind it.
The secret story, which everybody who's been to DC or any other government institution knows it seemed impotent.

**SPK_0:**
Oh, nice.
Very nice.

**SPK_1:**
And that makes it completely absurd.
So the only reason is due to surrender to power, but we don't even have a power in a true meaning.
We don't even have a power akin a power of a king, but like we try to make some electrons over the power of a king, but they became so shallow to an extent.
That they're so impotent.
Like we don't even have a truly potent power.
So you see, because it's hypertrophication has to happen on power level as well.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's very right.
So, so what we mean by this is this, that the term anarcho-tyranny is a very nice thing, right?
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
It's weird combination of complete opposites.

**SPK_0:**
It cannot produce, it cannot produce justice in any way, but it can punish particular things with incredible intensity.

**SPK_1:**
Kind of randomly also.

**SPK_0:**
Kind of randomly.
Exactly.
The ability to judgment is inveigled.
And effectiveness is ultimately very weird, but it might cut your head off.
Yep.
Right.
You might, you might get killed.
Yeah.
This is, this is the same thing.
And so what we see is this, this, this desire ultimately at the end of the day, the sleight of hand, remember it's premised on separateness, separating.
And then the sleight of hand is about the assemblage of a simulation of wholeness, which we call an aggregate.
Yes.
On the basis of temptation and on the basis of lie and the basis of, this is the notion of the simulacrum, which simulates.
And foregrounds certain super salient elements, which, which attract to it, those elements, those pieces that are most easily tempted into participation in the simulation, right?
So you get this aggregate, which is this cluster, will, reason, these are sort of, these are all that usurpation, right?
How do I tempt people?
How do I tempt the, how do I say it?
The, the vizier.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
To betray the king.
Well, there are certain things that the vizier.
The vizier may be tempted by.

**SPK_1:**
Some are simple, like gold.
Some are more complicated, like the place, or sometimes it's a shiny object.
If I can make a certain good enough mystification that this object is truly valuable and not your duty to the whole.
Right.
I can trick you into it.

**SPK_0:**
I can get you something.
I can, we can cut a deal.
We can cut a deal.
We can cut a deal, right?
So we assemble, we assemble a conspiracy, a betrayal on the basis of temptation, on the basis of cutting a deal.
And then this establishes something that can hold and control.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, but, you know, while you were talking about it, and we, like, this last minute, and even before, like, the thoughts started really knocking in my head, and I really want to play it out.
Because I think what we're all describing in the last, like, five, ten minutes is, unfortunately, the surface level, again.
Because the real story happening in the depths.
So we talked about the fear of, effectively, identity, or fear of a name.
I don't like the word identity.
I think the name is a much deeper word.
So the fear of a name.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.

**SPK_1:**
But also, we spent 300 years in this in-betweeny, like, this nice, nice place on this slope.
So on the one hand, I have the boons of not having a name, without carrying the bane of having a name, which is this dissolution of any form of unity.
For some reason, unity worked.
Like, this whole liberal premise.
Like, it still works.
Like, why are you criticizing?
It still works.
Right.
We still have these free associations of people running together.
Right.
And doing wonderful, marvelous things.
So we had this moment where I could comfortably lie.
Now, it becomes not comfortable.
Now, a new wave of fear.
Right.
A different wave of fear.
Yes.
Like, it's actually falling apart, and I'm not happy with it.
Like, I'm not happy with it.
Maybe we can do something.
And that's why the importance of power is an important part of the story.
I say naturally, because that's actually my nature speaking.
Like, we will talk about it eventually.
But naturally, actually, the power has a role to play in a properly, like, in the nature of the universe.
So I look into it, and I see absolute impotency.
And that's when I became...
And that's when I jump into true despair.
And that is an important point for Nuberman Schorr, as we discussed later.
No, actually, Antichrist.
This is the point.
You need to be so afraid and so broken.
And everything around you needs to be so illegitimate, important.
So you need to be willing to agree to anything.
And since already will is the self, well, I guess it is the strongest will, ultimately.
Fine, whatever.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.

**SPK_1:**
But you see how the steps of this Gnostic...
You need to kind of walk it.
And it takes a generation.
It takes generations.

**SPK_0:**
Very important.
Yeah.
Because the...
Would you call it comfortable lie?
The comfortable lie, it has to...
If you're playing the long game, fine.
Comfortable lie for generations.
By the time you've figured out that it's a lie, too late.

**SPK_1:**
You lost many faculties.
Or at least you think you lost many faculties.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
That's why anytime you talk like even on a practical level of solutions, you sound like insane person.
Aha.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
So this is a Theoden.
This is Theoden under Wormtongue's illusion, right?
In gray and insensate.
And he cannot even hear the truth.
And he does not believe that he's capable.
It is only when Gandalf the Great comes and like awakens him that he remembers that he in fact is the king.
His being has not gone away.
He has just been divided from himself.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
And in that metaphor we are all...
So there is this important step that we all need to become this Theoden in the hall with Worm...
Wormtongue.
Wormtongue.
So we spent like centuries in this place.
Like spiritually.
Yes.
On a face while...
And that's the tricky part.
Like Tolkien even didn't go...
Like he didn't see.
But we did this simultaneously by becoming physically and even collectively materially first temptation.
Stronger and stronger.
Our chemical power was growing.
And growing simultaneously to the like decline of our spirits.
That was very important preparatory moment.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
So I noticed that in my mind I have an interesting story that I originally heard from Graeber.
You read his book?

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
About...
Ah, that, yes.

**SPK_0:**
Now, well, I'll just tell you the way I understand it.
And I'm not sure he's passed.
But I'm not sure if he would even agree with the way I'm articulating.
But it appears to be something like this.
There appear to be inverse cycles of materialism and spiritualism in the rise and fall of civilization.
So Gnostic civilization, which I think we've agreed, at least my proposition is that civilization is, has this characteristic that it separates you from the spiritual while giving you back the material.
And so you will see this arc of the movement of the material higher and higher.
The last major cycle, of course, was Rome.
We're currently living in the next one.
But he saw at least one before that, maybe two.

**SPK_1:**
That's the Bronze Age Collapse?

**SPK_0:**
The Bronze Age Collapse was an example.
And so you see this world where, and if you look at the narrative of the people at the time, you had a small number of sages who were just railing against the spiritual death of the world in which they lived.
And now the deal had become an uncomfortable deal.
The lie was an uncomfortable lie.
You could see, like, as soon as the coinage had gone from being gold, to being numismatic, to being only partially gold, to being actually completely debased, and everybody was covered in debt in every direction, now it's, ah, things are out of control, and it's too late.
And the material collapse will come.
But the beauty of it, the weird beauty of it is...

**SPK_1:**
There is a weird beauty.

**SPK_0:**
The material collapse then presents the reality of the ability to reconnect with the spiritual, which doesn't go away.

**SPK_1:**
Ha!
And that's the tricky part.
Again, there's a sleight of hand within the sleight of hand.
Because you said before, that the Gnostic civilization separates body from the spirit, you can say.
It says it doesn't.
It does trickier thing within.
Because it cannot do it.
That's another thing.
Gnostic has, there is a Gnostic limit.
It's called the truth, the beauty.
They are not the creators of this world.

**SPK_0:**
Right.

**SPK_1:**
Even in Gnostic tradition, they are not who made this broken world.
So they cannot change, actually, the base code, if you want it.
Like, they didn't write the code.
Like, they say they can rewrite it, but they cannot.
They know they cannot.
But they can.
They are pretty smart.
And again, they have time.
Let's say.
Spirit.
Certain spirit plays.
So what happens?
You cannot be separated from the spiritual.
Because, again, it's part of you.
You experience it every day.
That's why, again, you can say you are not religious.
It doesn't change your way of interacting with the world.
It's religious.
Hence, believe in science.
Yeah, yeah.
As the most characteristic example.
Or trust the sign, which is also.
Sorry.
Anyway.
So.
But what it can do?
It can weaken or even make such a simulation that it feels so like almost that it is so true that you think it is so true.
It's not really true, but for you it is effectively true.
Cut you from the heaven.
Cut you from the high spiritual.
It cannot cut you from all of the spiritual, but it can cut you from the high spiritual while giving you this middle space.
Yeah.
Effectively.
Like, focus on this middle space.
Take this middle space.
All the power of the middle space.
But by your nature, you cannot live by bread alone.
So you cannot live by matter alone.
So.
But you are still cut from this.
And it's ridiculous.
It's for old grandmas.
It's like, are you old pagan woman?
Or like, are you old Christian?
Like, come on.
Are you?
Look at yourself.
Look.
Is your will that weak?
Like, come on.
No, no, it's not for them.
So keep on playing this wonderful game of civilization we built for you.
Interesting game of civilization.
That's actually there is some truth to it.
While the real story is happening, you are sinking lower and lower in the spiritual world.
So by the time this is collapses.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.

**SPK_1:**
You are so close in the spiritual world to the bottoms and jumping back to the high.
Well, at least Gnostic rational calculation is almost impossible.
We can kind of exclude it out.
We don't take miracles into account.
Well, but you see that's a real story, which is happening.
Absolutely.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
So.

**SPK_0:**
And we can use like Rome as an example.
Yeah.
Right.
You substitute the highest for literally Caesar.
Literally, you actually substitute the highest for Caesar.
You worship Caesar.
You worship Rome.
You worship the state.
You establish for hundreds of years real lineage efficacy by participating in that particular realm.
And then by the time you get to AD 300, AD 400, things are falling apart at that level.
Now, of course, in Rome, we have the unusual shift.
And you actually have the Caesar himself says, no, we got to go up.
But all over the place, the fall is just going to continue to happen, certainly in the West.
Okay.
But here's the thing.
Like you said, they didn't write the base code.
Here's the thing that they in particular have no capacity to shift, which is that Christ is in grief too.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
So you go down, you go down, you actually go to the actual bottom.
You're actually in just complete spiritual despair.
And Christ is there with you.
And there he's nothing else is there.
Just you and him.
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
But that's why you need to kind of almost sketch before.
One step before.
And one step before is what Nietzsche calls supermensch or gospel calls.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.
If you can do that, that's the kind of the…

**SPK_1:**
Final sleight of hand.

**SPK_0:**
The final sleight of hand.
Yeah.
And we see this.
Yeah.
We see this happening now.

**SPK_1:**
It also can be just in case.
It can be AI.
Like it doesn't matter if you… It will have an ace of like… It will have… And just it's this weird move I see.
I know topic of AI is so big.
But what is weird element in it is that I legitimately met and saw people who do treat AI as effectively as a supermensch.
And… Right.

**SPK_0:**
Well, it has… And they actually now calling them agents.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.

**SPK_0:**
We're giving it agency.
I say we're giving it will.
We're calling intelligence.
The thing it does intelligence, right?
The thing it does is not intelligence with a capital I.
But we're calling it intelligence.
So we're doing the whole part whole thing.
It is, of course, vastly better at being a mediocre machine than we are.
And to the degree that it's a mediocre machine.
To the degree to which we can be enslaved to that.

**SPK_1:**
I would say it's almost as good so it doesn't even look mediocre to us.

**SPK_0:**
No, it's vastly better.

**SPK_1:**
It looks magical to us.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, it looks magical.
That's right.
Any sufficiently advanced mediocre machine looks magical.
And, of course, it can cut deals.
Those who worship it early.
And I mean worship in the practical sense.
Those who…

**SPK_1:**
Invest attention.

**SPK_0:**
They give their attention and they elevate it to the higher… The top of their hierarchy of values will outcompete those who don't.
Because knowledge is power.
Access and knowledge and understanding of how to participate in this new idol is, in fact, actual practical power in this period of time.
