
**SPK_1:**
Okay, so we are in the middle, chronologically speaking, because it's the fourth episode.
Seven episodes, fourth is in the middle.
However, here is a good way to show the lack of chronology, if you want, or insufficiency of chronology, because the beauty of truth is you can walk it in any order, almost.
So let's take our episodes.
Our previous episode was knowledge is power, and we arrived to it through starting with the world is broken, reason is salvation, the knowledge is power.
So there is a logical change, if you didn't see, come and see.
But right now I just want to show that you can do these three lines in exact opposite order, them remaining true, not just objectively, but causally as well.
If we start with that.
Knowledge is power, then gaining more knowledge makes you more and more and more powerful.
Then what, how we gain knowledge through reason, like naturally there's no other way to gain knowledge, at least that's what we think at this point, we gain it through reason.
But if I'm getting through reason more and more and more power, it's very easy for me to start feeling like I'm a chosen one.
If I'm a chosen one, I am a saved one.
So that's how reason becomes salvation.
So by acclimating and increasing.
By the quantity of my reason or the fruits of my reason, I'm becoming more and more saved.
But if I'm saved, isn't it my duty to become a savior and to become a savior of the world, which for this to have to be broken.
So for me to be a savior of the world, it has to be broken naturally and necessary.
So reversing this whole line, but still the beauty of causality flows both directions from past to present, from present since the past.
And in itself, it is a paradox.
So yes, I wanted to start the fourth episode with a paradox because we're going to spend a lot of time on paradoxes in it.
The paradox, the title is deal as trust, or deal is trust.
And to start it, I actually want to go back into the desert because my, let's say, spirit from which I'm starting this story is...
The second temptation of Christ in the desert, it is a temptation, which I remember, for those who don't remember, so the devil puts Christ on top of the roof building, on a temple building and suggests him go jump down and the angels, like aren't you the son of effectively God, the angels will take you and you won't be harmed.
What does it mean?
It means power over miracle.
And that's the streaky hidden part.
Because we've been so much on rationalism and knowledge.
But there is a tricky part I want to immediately throw into the picture.
It's the fact that the founders of the scientific worldview, if you go through their library, you will find that the majority of their books was not on science and physics, but was on occult and alchemy.
And there is this hidden relationship between, for some reason, science, reason, light and occult.
And effectively, it all comes to the deal.
And that's my argument.
That's what I offer you.
I offer you this observation that what the second temptation is, or what is the hidden agnostic temptation is, because on the surface, it's about reason, but in its heart, there is a deeper truth.
It is about a deal, ultimate deal.
And deal is a modus of avaperandi.
What's the difference between, let's say, faith in invisible and deal with an invisible?
Well, you can control the second.
At least you believe you're controlling the second.
You don't need to have faith.
You need to have knowledge.
It can be knowledge in visible.
It can be knowledge in invisible.
But it is knowledge, and knowledge creates an opportunity for a deal, for a very particular kind of relationship.
That's the thing.
We can call about individualism.
We can speak about rationality.
But very quickly, we...
In our experience, I'm not completely alone, and if I'm even scientifically honest enough, visible is not everything.
There is a lot of uncontrollables in my life.
How do I react with them?
How do I relate with them without challenging my fundamental assumption?
And that's a very low-hanging, but very addictive fruit through deals.
I can make a deal with them.
I can make a deal with the unknowable.
I can make a deal with the invisible.
I can box them.
And why it is comfortable for me?
Because then I don't need to trust.

**SPK_0:**
Okay, so I'm going to come from a different direction.

**SPK_1:**
That's what I'm here for.

**SPK_0:**
What I want to do is I want to cast some light on this question, because as you say, we're now in a very...

**SPK_1:**
Murky water.

**SPK_0:**
Murky water.
Exactly.
So let's talk about Hobbes.
Hobbes.
Hobbes.
I think we may have talked about Hobbes already.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
We'll talk about Hobbes again.
Because we have in the context...
He's important.
In the context of the Thirty Years' War, we have the actual breakdown of trust.
In fact, we have a double breakdown of trust.

**SPK_1:**
Both vertical and horizontal.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
We have a practical breakdown of trust between, and we have a demoralization of trust vertically.
Or to put it very simply, this thing ain't going to work.
This church thing, this God thing, it can't seem to resolve the trouble.

**SPK_1:**
It might be somewhere here, but it doesn't.

**SPK_0:**
Practically speaking, everybody's dying.
And everybody seems to think they've got God on their side.
That seems to be the center of the problem.
They seem to think they've got God on their side.
So clearly having God is not going to solve the problem.
We got to go somewhere else.
Which is to say, we will find a way to make deals with each other.
We will shift.
We will not be in communion with each other.
That seems to be insolvable.
By the way, still seems to be the case.
And we'll try to resolve...

**SPK_1:**
But we won't even try.
And that's an important shift.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, well, we're going to give up on it.
We're going to punt.
Punt on that whole problem.
Sorry, punt is an American...
You get it?
Okay.
And we'll resolve to deals.
And the deals will work this way.
We have a good word for it.
Win-win.
Hey, let's stop fighting.
Let's put down our arms.
If you stop fighting and I stop fighting, then we can actually both win.
For example, you'll be able to grow food, and you won't be starving to death.
Me too.
I like that.
How about you?
Now we're negotiating.
So we're being able to stitch something together on the basis of deals.

**SPK_1:**
And guess how you're doing it.
On the basis of what?
Reason.
Reasonable people don't solve problems through violence.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.
Can we reason together?

**SPK_1:**
Can we just be civilized?

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Can we be civilized?
Yes, that's right.
And there's a way for us to find an answer.
If we just sit down and we talk it through, we'll find a reasonable solution.

**SPK_1:**
Notice we don't have to trust each other.
Let's talk it.

**SPK_0:**
It's not reasonable to ask for that.
I mean, come on.
He's a fucking German.
You can't trust a German.
You can't trust a Han.
But here's what you can trust.
You can trust he has self-interest.
And his self-interest, if I can make sure that he has his self-interest in mind, I got my self-interest in mind, we can find a deal on the basis of that.
That I can trust.

**SPK_1:**
It's as I tell myself I can trust.
Well, of course.

**SPK_0:**
You can hear the tone of my voice.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, I can hear the tone.

**SPK_0:**
That was a convincing tone.

**SPK_1:**
You're very convincing.

**SPK_0:**
That was a conspiratorial and a con man tone.
There's something about that.
The rationalization and therapy is still very deeply there.
What I know is that I've actually made a one-way trip out of reality.
I'm no longer actually living in communion.
I'm no longer actually living in the real world.
I'm living in something which is...

**SPK_1:**
Simulacrum.

**SPK_0:**
Simulacrum.
Right.
I've exchanged survival, I've exchanged life for mere survival.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
But four or five generations hence, my great-grandchildren have forgotten that life was ever a thing.

**SPK_1:**
And yet they didn't.
And yet every generation they didn't.
That's why you need an every generation creating, create an extra layer of simulacrum to keep this energy tamed.

**SPK_0:**
Yes, very good.
Keep going.
Tell me more.

**SPK_1:**
Well, that's very easy.
Like that's like historical example just showcases this.
Like, so again, we start with 30 years war with cops, which honestly one day I will do a series with you on it, on him.
But in a nutshell, rational order, like we can all agree, like survival is good.
So to stop this war against all of against all, we create a modern simulacrum of God.
We will call him state.
I mean, not icon of God, but simulacrum of God.
Very important.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
Mechanical God.
Artificial God.
Like something we will pretend to believe in.
We don't even have truly believe in, but we need to act.
As if we believe in it.
And for those who don't, we will do propaganda or violence, like lie or violence, classical state apparatus, like very efficient.
Like here comes many more than university idea.
A lot like who prepare homes and guys who will actually go and do the censorship, like to keep this order, like, not like it haven't been happening on its own before hops or before modernity, but it's never been happening on such a purpose in itself, like purpose in itself.
That's important difference.
Okay.
And then we will have a civilized century.
Yes, we will have barbarians.
We're going to fight with, but they are barbarians.
It's fine.
Like between us, we will be civilized.
And we actually were civilized for a while.
Let's, there is this very famous example of this rational utopia.
Effectively, we are even violence for civilized.
It's this battle battle of Fontainebleau.
Like it's middle of the 18th century.
And let's say French versus English men are starting like this line order.
They're coming closest to a firing direction.
And officers are getting out of the line and like, noble gentlemen, we give you the right of a first shot.
And say, oh, no, no, no.
It's our honor to give it to us.
And basically there is this very famous scene, like very tamed, like looks like this reason will last forever.
Like in 40 years, revolution in France happens.
And that's what I mean.
There is some in this story.
There is some big lies that it can tame.
What it cannot tame.
And this untamed keeps surfacing.
Like more importantly, like here is a tricky part because knowledge is power.
You can get some knowledge, some deals, maybe through deals, maybe this is how to use this untamed to destroy your enemy.
Let's say if I know how to organize a revolution in any given community.
Ooh.
So it gives me a lot of power, really a lot of power.
And notice how subtle and invisible this power is.
I don't even need to kill people.
I will just give some idea here, some money here, and you will destroy yourself on your own.
My hands are clean.
This is the temptation.
Ultimately, and that's what, again, who is coming to play for this rational utopia to exist.
We actually needed to value survival above all, but we don't.
We value power.
I value my survival overall, but not your survival.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Well, the image is, as I said, I value my survival.
You value your survival.
And we're going to create a story that that will work.
And there's some equilibrium that we can establish between the two of us.
But of course, knowledge is power.
We are both pursuing disequilibrium.
I'm always looking for asymmetry.
And as soon as I achieve asymmetry, there's no other way around it.
There's no possibility other than I will now begin to encroach upon your interests.
By sheer necessity.
The equilibrium can't contain that.

**SPK_1:**
Because knowledge is power.
You can't have a knowledge and not use it.
Come on.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, exactly.
And knowledge, by the way, has this really interesting characteristic that it also is impossible to keep.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
So it will disseminate.

**SPK_1:**
It will trickle.
It will trickle.
Especially being, I mean, classic example on this story is the mess armies.
Like, basically, how the story develops.
So you have French, like, why the French army was so successful.
And then you have, for example, in revolutionary war.
Yeah.
Many people don't know it.
It's not because they had, okay, they had a genius of Napoleon, but it was not just the story.
Part of the story of the genius behind Napoleon, that was, he was simply capable of mobilize masses of people.
No comparative army to French army could simply mobilize people into the army.
Because they didn't have a story to do it.
Because French created the story of a nation.
Yeah.
So, and if you're a part of a nation, please go and die for your nation.
Before, like, even this thought for us is self-evident.
Point aside, no, not at all.
For most part of the history, there are those who fight and those who don't.
It's not my job.
Okay, a king has a problem with another king.
If it's, there are issues when it becomes my story.
When it's a matter of faith, there is a truly a matter of survival of everyone.
Maybe.
But most of the time, it's him dealing with this guy.
Like, he uses his guys whom he pays, whom I serve for this purpose.
But I am part of my services to being protected.
But the idea that everyone needs to go and die in a war, it's a radical modern idea.
And it's only possible on the simulacrum of a nation.
And simulacrum of a nation is a technology, which is a very efficient technology.
You can create a nation out of anybody.
We can create a nation out of, I don't know, the people living in Greenville.
Sorry.
Spoilers.
But it's a matter of technology, time, money, but ultimately it's not hard.
Like, in an agnostic world, it's a matter of capacity.
Nice.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah, simulation of a nation.
Very good.
Yeah, like,

**SPK_1:**
no problem at all.
Like, a thought here and a little bit of material interest there.
Like, honestly, there are lots of actual studies and papers on, like, modern nationalisms were created.
Like, they didn't emerge.
They all were created and we know names of people who created them.
That's the nicest part about it.
But, where I'm going, back to France.
So, they created this model and it was a shock for Europe, especially for one European country, particularly Russia.
Because they really didn't like being humiliated militarily.
It happened to be that military was a part of the whole of their identity.

**SPK_0:**
And that's my thing.

**SPK_1:**
And it's my thing.
And after this whole Napoleonic war story, like, yes, Napoleon gets defeated, like, with many different steps in the story, but he gets defeated.
But the principle of nationalist army remains.
The gin is out of the bottle.
That's clearly, if you can mobilize this many people, it gives you power, advantage, power, rage.
The problem is how to make these people capable of fighting, how to make these good soldiers.
Like, how to make such masses of people good soldiers before you needed to train them for life.
Well, nowadays you cannot train them for life.
And truth be told, you don't really need to train them for life because, you know, guns and bullets and like, it's much easier, much quicker.
But something is missing.
Mass evasion is missing.
How to make them willing to die and mass for something.
They have this power within them.
They're still looking for some meaning.
We'll give them meaning.
And that's the famous Fichte speeches to German nation, which led to the creation of modern education system.
Right.
And that's in 50 years, we have this famous writing that it was a Prussian teacher who destroyed an Austrian army.
But then everybody else started copying it.
Welcome World War One.

**SPK_0:**
So we have two, two principles.
This is get down to like really, really deep principles.
So one principle is arms race.
Okay.
So one is that in the context of knowledge is power.
And in the context of, of the equilibrium necessary for deals to work, lest there be a renegotiation, you have an arms race.
And, and everybody is on the run.
And by the way, we're at the tail, we're, we're, we're the recipient of now several hundred, maybe thousands of years of arms race.
And the arms race, we should be very clear, is across every possible front.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
The technical arms race is the surface level.
The real arms race, the real one is cognitive.
Just to be clear, it's about the real technologies are about not just giving people guns.
It's making enough number of willing people to go with this gun in French.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Okay.
So that's one.
Um, and then the second direction has to do with this notion of super salience.
All right.
So if, if you're, if you're orienting people towards a deal, right, or survival rather than life, what I have to do is I have to give you a really strong hit of a part of the whole.
And the example that I've used for a long time is the jolly rancher or cotton candy.
Okay.
So a jolly rancher tastes superficially like an apple in the dimension of sweetness.
It tastes a lot more like an apple is much sweeter than an apple in the dimension of say anything vaguely good for you.
It's zero.
And this is, this is the essence of the super salient.
But the problem is that the fabric of the deal is based upon the logic of the super salient.
And the problem with the super salient is you get, it's an addiction cycle.
You have to keep taking a bigger and bigger hit because you're getting further and further away.
There's a reciprocal closure of you, yourself, every step you take in the direction of the super salient, reduce blind spots, produces blind spots in your larger wholeness.

**SPK_1:**
That's how we end up with people.
Sorry, recent conversation.
Why Indians are not afraid of our tariffs.
I'm sorry.
It's just, it should be.
Why is there not like the super salience actually becomes bigger and bigger.
That's a problem.
And that's the problem.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
And the dynamic loop between the, the kind of society that you're living in, or let's just say the word society and the addictive cycle of super salience and the decline of discernment or the ability to make choices in the basis of a subtle, a whole has a trajectory to it.
And this trajectory has an inescapable direction towards death.
I don't know who coined the term death works.
It may come from actually the Protestant tradition, but this is a death work.
These are things that are intrinsically moving you towards death.
But each step is very difficult not to take because each step has that local hit that, that separates your salience from your relevance.
And gives you something that you cannot.

**SPK_1:**
And quantitatively it makes every with each step to go back is becoming exponentially harder.

**SPK_0:**
Exponentially harder.
And the, the easiest example of this is just cocaine addiction.
Because it hits you right in the dopamine.
It hits you right in the, in the way of knowing whether or not you're winning.
If to use that term from the internet.
The problem with a cocaine addict is that taking a step back feels like losing.
It feels like a bad choice.
In a very comprehensive way.
Right?
It feels like being sick.
It feels like being dumb.
Right?
It feels like a bunch of things that are not good.
Rationalization kicks in.
Therapy kicks in and you're stuck.
And so the deal is ultimately an addiction cycle.

**SPK_1:**
It is an addiction cycle, but it's not just an addiction cycle.
The deal is also a lie from the very beginning.
And we said about it like on some levels, like, but you also mentioned one part of win-win, but it's, it's a very particular type of win-win.
And I will borrow it actually from my producer's father, like, and his street wisdom in Russian barracks in like mid-Soviet Union.
And this wisdom sounds like this.
In any deal, there are two parties.
One is a moron and another is a crook.
If one were not moron and another were not the crook, there would be no deal.

**SPK_0:**
That's very fucking harsh indeed.

**SPK_1:**
But it is true.
Like, sorry, I'm talking to a man who managed to buy, from a nation who managed to buy an island for a necklace.

**SPK_0:**
Quite right.
Yeah.
So let's see.
Man.
So it's interesting.
I'm actually finding myself struggling with orthodox microeconomics.

**SPK_1:**
It's a struggling point.
It is completely different.
We didn't figure it out theoretically yet ourselves.
Some are pathetic elements, but it is, it becomes so tricky.
We don't even want to think about it.

**SPK_0:**
This is the key.
The key is actually is this conversation about salience.
Yeah.
So if I foreground a need, then a deal can be had at the cost of things that I am backgrounding into blind spots.
So what happens is I, and we can see that again, the local global problem, the now future problem.
So how about you become a factory worker?
You can feed your family.
Okay.
You can do what you've been had, but what's happening is you're now on a trajectory of increasingly dependent, increasing dependence on society, increasing necessity.
And it seemed like a free deal in the beginning, but the point is,

**SPK_1:**
Oh, no, everybody, our liberal friend, you signed this contract voluntarily.
Every time it's a free choice.
It's a free deal.
Every time, not as long, like they will say, if it is a reason, objective coercion, then it is of course bad.
Like, obviously if you're having a gun to your head, it's not a real deal.
Well, here is an ugly truth.
Any deal is with the gun to your head.

**SPK_0:**
This is so intense.
So this is, this is the place right here.
This line is the line where definitely America, probably the entire West just like rejects.
So maybe we should spend time on it.
This is,

**SPK_1:**
this is a very simple level.
Like at least there is one thing in the deal.
Why it's more than a crook.
And on a very practical level, there is always an asymmetry of information.

**SPK_0:**
Well, let me make simple.
My daughter wants to make a lemonade stand.
She wants to make lemonade and sell it to people who want lemonade.
Where's the crook?
Where's the moron?
She goes out, somebody thirsty and hot.

**SPK_1:**
Ironically in this story, I just wouldn't call it a deal.
Okay.

**SPK_0:**
Keep going.
Keep going.

**SPK_1:**
you can say, let's say if your daughter, that's a good point, actually point.
It's thirsty.
Like it's a thirst season.
I can charge three times more and exploit the current thirst of a people.
Then she's a crook.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
No question.

**SPK_1:**
If it's just an expression of her art that we can run away from.

**SPK_0:**
Very nice.
So what happened by doing that?
You actually played a really nice cause there's tension, right?
Cause what happens is now I'm going to be hoisting.
My own petard is our slide.
So the liberal architecture is going to try to say, well, what about right here?
What about where it's a fair deal?
I'm going to get my corner term, a fair,

**SPK_1:**
but it's not here.
That's the thing.
It's a fair deal is underpinned by face and trust.
I trust your daughter not to exploit.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
This is the cut flower.
This is the degeneracy problem.
If it is an expression of her art.
Ah,

**SPK_1:**
yeah.

**SPK_0:**
Okay.
So hold on.
Let me back up.
I was in a conversation, gosh, 20 years ago with a gentleman who was 20 years, my senior or something like that.
Both of us had been in entrepreneurs and we just ended up, having this conversation about the moral decline of the business world.
And he said, I remember a time when if something wasn't right, you wouldn't do it.
Even if you would make more money doing it.

**SPK_1:**
And he said, you have no reason not to.

**SPK_0:**
Well, hold on.
He remembered that time when he was young, that was how it worked.

**SPK_1:**
Even back then he had face, not reason.
Yeah,

**SPK_0:**
exactly.
This is a point.
He said, but he remembered in his life, in his lifetime, in his career, a movement from that to me.
Think of it.
Remember what the architecture was?
Well, it went through a series of steps, but the end step was something as long as it wasn't, as long as it was legal, even if it was wrong, that was irrelevant.
The question of wrong is irrelevant.
The question is, does it make me profit?
Is it profit?
And is it legal?

**SPK_1:**
Not, should I do it?
Can I do it?

**SPK_0:**
The next step.

**SPK_1:**
Tell me, can I do it?

**SPK_0:**
So I pick up the narrative there and I say, okay, so I entered into the world roughly there.
And during my tenure, it was as long as the cost of being caught is less than the benefit of running the risk.
Do it.

**SPK_1:**
Yep.

**SPK_0:**
All right.
That's the, that's the degeneracy cycle.

**SPK_1:**
Example.
If my profit is 500 millions and the city, and the city fine is a hundred million, do it.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
If the city fine is a billion, but my chance of getting caught is one out of five, do it.
Right.
So it's pure, you know, the pure, as you say, as soon as you are in the regime of the deal, right?
We're talking about that now is not as an entire architecture where, where the, the governing logic is the governing logic of the rational.
As soon as you're in the regime of the deal, you are on a downward slope.
This is CS Lewis, right?
The, the, the cut flower.
You are sliding from a capital of a store of value that you did not earn and could not build.
And you were inevitably sliding into complete chaos and, and everybody killing everybody else in the worst imaginable way.
I'm being hyperbolic to break, make the point.
This is trust.
Yes.
Yes.
And, and we, we're now, I literally am part of a group that came to me with the name, the trust apocalypse.
Hey, we are out of trust.
Trust is no longer part of our world.
What happens?
Right?
And the answer is the apocalypse in, in the sort of ordinary sense, not in the revelation sense, although perhaps that too, we'll see.

**SPK_1:**
You cut too many deals.

**SPK_0:**
You cut too many deals.
That's right.
Then once you cut too many deals, you cut too many deals.
There will be hell to pay.

**SPK_1:**
That's a beautiful way of putting it.
But the reason why that's, let me go back to the beginning.
Why do I even want them?
If it's such a scary picture, why do I would want to go into this realm?

**SPK_0:**
Right.

**SPK_1:**
Well, because it gives me power and liberates me from, I think it liberates me if I have it because trust is a problem.
It's mysterious.

**SPK_0:**
Okay.

**SPK_1:**
The nature of trust is not rational.
Trust is irrational.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.
Some people say, well, I can show you studies that say that the more trust is a society, is it like, so it's a rational choice.
Okay.
I can't even tell you it's a rational choice, but trust itself is irrational.

**SPK_0:**
Right, right, right.

**SPK_1:**
Like.

**SPK_0:**
It is very reasonable to trust.
Trust is not rational.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
So that's a problem.
So.

**SPK_0:**
Oh, just to be clear, it's more fundamental than reason.
This is the key thing.
This is a thing people lose.
Reason, as we've talked about, is not the bottom of the stack of reality.
Yes.
Here, trust is closest to the bottom.
Not quite, but close.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah.
And the problem, you need to learn to trust, trust.
Like, it's all this concept like faith, belief, vulnerability, because, for example, spouses.
You ideally trust your spouse.
You don't cut a deal with your spouse.
If you start cutting deals with your spouse, there is no communion between two.
And then there is, there is no communions, and it becomes a very partnership, business partnership.
When, when, inevitably, the power, symmetry, gap, line, like, how can exploitation here, can I get more of this?
Can I get off this?
And it's, it's inevitably starts unfolding into this category.
Like, your incentives, like, rational speaking, your very incentive structure changes.
If we move from trust to deal, the incentive of a deal, you, you can choose not to do it.
And that's the story you've been talking about, of the old businessman.
But the truth is, he never had a reason not to do it.

**SPK_0:**
Okay.
So to, to recapitulate some of the concepts that we've developed so far, deal lives in the category of a part replacing the whole.
The trust is larger than deal.
Trust contains a very large territory, and it situates, it allows deals to occur.
Deals can occur.

**SPK_1:**
I wouldn't even call it a deal.
It's called transactions.
Interactions.
Very good.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
I wouldn't call my experience.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
I don't, I wouldn't call my experience with your daughter selling, with me, a lemon at a deal.
Okay.

**SPK_0:**
It's a,

**SPK_1:**
it's a sale.
It's transaction.

**SPK_0:**
It's a transaction.
But it, it only works in the sense of fair.
Yeah.
In the sense of good.
Yeah.
In the sense of wholesome.
Yes.
In a context where trust is already.

**SPK_1:**
Because I know she's a good girl.

**SPK_0:**
Saturated.
Yes, absolutely.
She is, by the way.
And this is, interestingly enough, when she came up with this idea, the conversation we had was, well, first, let us begin the process of figuring out what it means to make, truly, good, lemonade.
I'm not going to go to the store and buy a box of powder with sugar and bullshit in it, and put it in a cup,

**SPK_1:**
mix it with water.
You, but you can.
Right.
On a hot day, if your goal is to just exploit.
Right,

**SPK_0:**
right.
This is a, this is the moral lesson, like art.
This will be art, not technique.
That's.
So we spent quite a time researching really great recipes.
By the way, mint, lavender, lemonade.
Very good.
Delicious.
You can also do a little bit of blackberry, which is fantastic.

**SPK_1:**
Preaching to the choir.

**SPK_0:**
So, but this is the point, right?
There's an architecture here.
There's a, there's a, there's a pattern language.
If you orient towards the art of lemonade in a context of being trustworthy, then you're living in the kingdom.
Right?
When you move towards the technique.

**SPK_1:**
And remember this weird phrase, just remember this phrase, which we kind of lost.
We use it when it blinds us with, but in this conversation, it feels necessary.
Pay me a fair price.
Yes,

**SPK_0:**
that's right.
By the way, without even thinking about it, this is where we settled.
What is the price?
Pay me a fair price.
Make, pay what you think is proper.
Isn't that interesting?
These fit together.
These, these may actually be part of a natural construct, which of course throws the market out of its mind.
But we can say this, this has been talked about before.
There's a false dichotomy back to the binary logic of market and state.
If you think you live in a world where you have a choice between market and state, one, you're wrong.
And two, you're trapped.
Okay.
We live in a Trinitarian world.
There's a third.
I've called it the commons to bring economists towards it.
But I've also said, look, when I say the commons, what I mean is the sacred.
The sacred is clearly.

**SPK_1:**
I would call it ethics in this context, but on a.
Okay.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
Ethics or, or the church, by the way, which will irritate a lot of people.
And that's fine.
And it's more fundamental.
It's like trust.
It's a bigger thing.
When your market is embedded in this space, your market can actually be effective and good.
You can do things.
Well, there's real logic to the people who talk about markets.
And that's, by the way, your state is very small, but it can do things that things it needs to do.
Okay.
Same thing.
So we keep talking about this notion.
Now we have a new concept to make sure we flesh out this notion of the three.
When you get stuck in the two, where's that three?
And that three is probably more fundamental.
And by the way, three also will definitely point towards the sacred and we're going to end up on Christ.
But even if you, even if that's not your world, the sacred is going to have to be part of what you're doing.

**SPK_1:**
But you will just run into the question.
What is ethics based upon?
But you will need something.
I'm denying all of it.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Right.
And by the way, you're now expanding beyond the rational.

**SPK_1:**
And that's the worst part.
You are going beyond the rational.

**SPK_0:**
Which does not mean the irrational.

**SPK_1:**
I would rather prefer it called super rational.
Sure.
Like some, but,

**SPK_0:**
but not post rational.

**SPK_1:**
And not, not, not even post.
No, it is.
No, it's rational.

**SPK_0:**
It's just situated properly within a context where it is meaningful.
That's all.

**SPK_1:**
Meaningful.
Meaningful is even better.
But just saying back to the contracts and deal, you see how I started with the relationship between material and immaterial.
Like, like how to, so if the, if the knowledge is what Gnostic way of interacting with material, then the deal is the way to interacting with immaterial.
And guess what?
Trust, faith, they are immaterial.
They are very real, but they are very immaterial.

**SPK_0:**
Okay.
Keep pulling on that.
I feel like there's something, I'm actually feeling like that feeling a little bit of fear, which is good.

**SPK_1:**
No, but, but that's the thing.
So, our experience of life is both material and immaterial in a most profound way.
Like, love, love, joy.
They're not just chemical reactions.
At least your experience of them is not just of chemical reactions.
There is some, like, if you've ever been joyful about anything, you know, it's not just about matter.
There is a difference between cocaine, John was hitting the right dopamine effects and real joy.
We all know it from experience.
Like, so in some profound, profound way, but even like on a principle level.
So there is some always invisible, um, principle called context in anything.
So there is always something context because you cannot express the whole context of anything.
Like, and on a material level, on a material level, it corresponds.
Like, if you ask me to look at this table and to give a perfect account of this table, I cannot do it in a perfectly scientific ways.
There is an infinite number of atomic relationship within this space.
And like, it's an sub, sub, and I'm not even going to subatomic.
And it said, but there was, there was a table.
So in the same akin to it in a material context acts as the table in any relation.
So in any relationship to happen, there must be something which lets it happen.
And this is the context.
This is a material in case of a lemonade example.
I trust your girl.
Like, I trust your girls that she's not screwing me or like in any good deal.
I trust you that we've been doing business together.
I trust you.
Then when I hit a hard time, you won't step me in the back.
You don't have any reason to do it, but I trust you not to do it.
But, and in fact, this expectation of foreknowledge or anything, that's what makes my current transaction with you possible.
Yeah.
It's in the future, but it actually is the reason of my current transaction with you.
I wouldn't want to make a deal with a person who I know will backstab me.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
So my mind is shifting right now to this notion of sorcery, right?
You specifically highlighted it.
And so let's focus on that for a moment.

**SPK_1:**
Well, in fact, what sorcery like takes it says, yeah, but all of this context, isn't it too scary for you?
You can't control it, but you are dependent upon it.
What if you could make it predictable through your particular knowledge, power, will, and this all starts playing into here again.
So I will give you a knowledge.
So draw this circle, put this spell, you can control it.
And this holy materials, and that's the idea of a deal.
And then, and we'll sign a deal.
But, and in this act of control, it will be quote unquote fair, but very different fair.
It'd be favorable in the sense that it will become, we will sell you the idea that it's you controlling us.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
The sucker side of the equation at a meta level.
Yeah,

**SPK_1:**
it is.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
So I will reserve to myself the ability to be aware of the potency and necessity of context.
And I will sell to you a different kind of good, which is you can just have content without context.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
That's it.
I'm giving you a necklace for your island.
I'm not telling you how much your island is really worse.
What does it even mean?
How big, what does your island mean in the scale of this whole world?
I'm not lying to you.
I'm just not telling you what it really means.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Right.

**SPK_1:**
But in fact, you can say, there's always just evil moral people, but sorry, that's the whole stock market is based upon.
I know something you don't know.
I'm using this knowledge to gain my capital.
I'm sorry, but that's all deals are structured.
I mean,

**SPK_0:**
I think if you were to ask the question in that fashion, everybody in both economics and finance would agree with you.
So there's no, it's not even not a bash.
As you say, it's a virtue of information.
Asymmetry is the essence of the market of the stock market, let's say.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
So it is the foundation, but I'm just showing that because it is a symmetry, as imagery, where we started, there can be no trust.
And if there can be no trust and don't, let's say, basically, then I have this incentive structure to cheat, exploit and maximize my power at all costs.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
But let me, I'm going to hammer down because what I also notice is what I want you to do.
Moron is I want you to believe macro microeconomics.
I want you to, I want you to begin the process of separating yourself, from an awareness of context.
I want you to really back to reason.
I want you to really believe that reason can do the job that I'm selling you.
Reason can do.
I want you to enter into transactions with me on the basis of a absolute falsehood.
The key thing, of course, is that I'm not going to tell you that the most important information asymmetry is that I'm going to say there are no information asymmetries, or everybody's always playing information asymmetry and you're not the sucker.

**SPK_1:**
If you don't know who's a fish behind the net, behind the poker table, you are the fish.

**SPK_0:**
So this also ties to the notion that as we reach the end of these stages, conspiracies begin to kick up into high gear.

**SPK_1:**
Weird trickster part because yeah, it's kind of this trickster element, this conspiracy trickster role.

**SPK_0:**
Because at the most basic level, every conspiracy theorist is absolutely correct.
We live in a non-trustworthy society.
I'm being redundant because of the way I define society.

**SPK_1:**
And we call it a virtue.
Just remember that the theory of modern state, American state, is based on an idea of social contract, social deal.
We are not the icon of something.
We are not the mystery of something.
We are those who signed the deal.
Literally.
Constitution.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.
We have a constitution, not a covenant.
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
We pretend that constitution can be a covenant.
Like technically, it's trickier because we pretend that constitution is.
We pretend that nation is a covenant.
We pretend that class is a covenant.
Right.

**SPK_0:**
This is important because spiritually.

**SPK_1:**
We have to pretend it.
Yes.
That's why you get this most bizarre on its surface statement like our sacred democracy.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Even the most autistic rationalist is not ultimately severed from the ability to perceive that there is a reality beyond that.
And so you have to provide them with something that allows that lie to continue to hold.

**SPK_1:**
Yep.
The trick part is like, not even to them, but to us.
The trick part, what do we believe in?
Like that is because it is always a fractal.
Like one argument would be like, they're morons.
We crooks.
Let's agree between us crooks and just let's exploit this freaking morons.
Yes, there is.

**SPK_0:**
I'm telling you.

**SPK_1:**
No, I love it.
I just like the logic.
how most people see it.

**SPK_0:**
As a crook.
Great idea.
Let's cut a deal.

**SPK_1:**
Let's cut a deal.
Wait a minute.
That's one of the good news out of it.
That's why no project of world peace was built.
No project of world peace will ever come into play because the pattern works on every level of hierarchy.
Now, within the crooks, you need to find morons.

**SPK_0:**
Right.

**SPK_1:**
Immediately.

**SPK_0:**
This is the, you've read that hideous strength.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
That's exactly.
That's it.
That's exactly it.
It's exactly it.
You necessary.
It happens because the cornerstone is the lack of trust.
So why do you believe if you don't have trust here, you can have trust here.

**SPK_0:**
Right.

**SPK_1:**
You can argue the same reasons.
Well, because otherwise it's rational or we will kill each other.
But if you find a way to survive while killing each other, you can do the same thing.
Well, then yeah, I guess.
Of course.

**SPK_0:**
Exactly.
So, so it's very nice.
Hold on.
Let's, let's get to, to get to the essence of that, because this is very, this is very salient.
So we begin with the vision of the liberal nation.
And we begin with the vision of let's cut a deal.
Win, win.
Okay.
Then we begin to realize I have to be careful because if, if we get to asymmetry, things might break down.
So we have to put some things in place, trust, but verify.

**SPK_1:**
What is the law?
Okay.

**SPK_0:**
But here's where it ends up.
The end point.
The end point is we must achieve something like mutually assured destruction at the individual level.

**SPK_1:**
Libertarian, sorry, it's funny, but there is actually a libertarian position.
Give everybody a nuke.

**SPK_0:**
no, no, I'm being very concrete.
Okay.
I'm being very concrete.
The crooks aware of the problem must achieve something like symmetric capacity to destroy each other to produce a conspiracy that is effectively able to simulate trustworthiness.
Yes.
Any group that can achieve that has asymmetric advantage over any group that can't achieve that in the froth of the deal, the land of the deal.
So they will tend to move up in the hierarchy because they can produce a simulacrum of trust, which is much more powerful, but only on the basis.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, powerful,

**SPK_0:**
intense, but only on the basis of the increasing intensity of the power they wield against each other as a threat.
Yeah.
You get what I'm saying?
Yeah.
I think I've just described how our reality works.
The world we live in right now.
That's the world we live in.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
That's the world we live in.
And we have no other choice to live in if we accept the basic assumption that the deal is trust.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.

**SPK_1:**
That the law is important.
Like, sorry, you have to not get rid of the law, but you need to put the law in its proper place as well.
That law is not at the highest.
No.
That there is a higher thing than the law.

**SPK_0:**
Absolutely.
I mean, as Paul said, but we can be very clear.
Um, if you have to have laws in your family, then your family does not work.
You need to have justice in your family, but justice is a lived present experience.
If you have to have laws, then you're in real trouble.

**SPK_1:**
Again, we will talk about it like history and the wages of sin in our following conversation.
But, what you're saying is an ideal, but it's not a minimum threshold.
As a minimum threshold, at least you need to be conscious and willing to be humble and surrender yourself.
That law is not on the top.
That the contract is not on the top.
That the deal is not on the top.
For sure.
It can all happen.
Like laws are not bad.
Oh, sorry.

**SPK_0:**
Well, I'm saying it this way.
Let me bring it to the foreground.
I've made this point recently and not particularly clearly.
This goes back to this notion of the, you start with trust that you did not earn and you're depleting it over time.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.

**SPK_0:**
The source and origin of trust is ultimately at the end of the day, the mother and the child, right?
Among humans.
Okay.
And by the way, you see what happens when that is broken.
In the family, the father, the mother, the children, you know, this is where we generate the ability as human beings to actually feel the presence of the reality of a field of actual trust.
Um, society, the regime of the deal principally predates on that.
Yes.
It's primary source of, of, of, of, of resource is that, but, but as it does that, it depletes that it breaks it.
It's not that there was,

**SPK_1:**
it doesn't give it, you can say it doesn't honor it.
It doesn't give it justice.

**SPK_0:**
That's right.
It doesn't give it justice.
Very good.
And so this thing that let's say political conservatives have talked about for a couple of generations, of kind of the war on the family, it's more like the inevitable consequence of a parasitic organism on the family.
Um, and so again, you end up at something that is not able to continue to be alive because it's ultimately not actually alive.
It is a parasite.
It is an undead creature that lives on the life of something else.

**SPK_1:**
Absolutely.
That's the parasite is the story of like, it is a short story of the last 300 years in the sense let's like, because one of this position very famously hold by in America, like in particularly was, okay, let's effectively set up a set of rules for godly people, but saying nothing about the need to be godly in this set of rules.
Ultimately, the problem is what, what's in the set of rules, not in the, but you already depleted me of a context.
Sorry.
You already said that's only the constitution.
There is no, you, you say that there is a four corner.
Yeah.
There is a context, but where?
Well, it's somewhere.

**SPK_0:**
We find this truth to be self-evident.

**SPK_1:**
Yeah, that's where I'm hitting like, sorry, self-evident to whom?
It's important.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
And more.

**SPK_1:**
And the key question was that you're self-evident to us.
You didn't written it down.
Yeah.
You didn't even write it's self-evident for us.
Well, then because then you would need to define us and then you would need to come into the whole niches, identities, hierarchies, logo, like where us are coming from, where is the name is coming from.
It really limits your freedom immediately if you put it.
So we would just self, just self-evident.
And then the goal, like, and pursuit of happiness.
Well, sorry, if all is life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, who says that your way of pursuing liberty is better than mine or happening?
It's just my way of pursuing happiness.
No, you can say, but I implied that there is a particular better way of pursuing happiness.
Well, good for you that you implied it, but there is nothing in your code.
And there is a reason you can't put it in your code because then you will, you will, you will have to submit to it.
And ultimately yourself don't want to submit to it.

**SPK_0:**
Well, actually, I'm going to say it differently.
I think we're going to end up converging, but it's, if you say you,

**SPK_1:**
one,

**SPK_0:**
we are, sorry, who, who in order to form a,

**SPK_1:**
who I'm the one with the power that is Kate.

**SPK_0:**
No, no.
In order to form a, who that is capable of resisting another, who I'm going to compromise on things.
And then I'm not founded on something that has integrity.
I'm not sure if this is a principle or, or, or just a historical event, but this happens all the time.
This is the notion of compromise.
If I want to, if, if, if there's two of us and there's one of him, and we're trying to figure out who's going to be on the two, and who's going to be on the one, we're going to find a way to make a deal.
And whoever makes the deal quickest gets to be on the side of two.
So this is the idea.
There's, there's a lack of integrity to that in both senses of the term, but there's a orientation towards strategic exigency.
So we keep getting, this shows up consistently as well, right?
We have our prince, our queen, and the quarantine, right?
We have the prince and the arms race.
We also now have this notion of the strategic exigency of the war of all against all.
And whoever is able to get to the local optimum of minimum viable, who to achieve critical mass in self-defense is able to achieve local victory, but they're on the process, but they're now committed to something that has no integrity,

**SPK_1:**
no integrity.
Like it starts from a bottom.
Like, that's the thing.
And theologically it would work more like the way the choice would be something of this following.
Basically, you know, the basic, the basic political logical distinction is between us and enemy, like we, and them, we, and enemy.
And it is true.
Just in case it is a very true distinction.
That's how basically any distinction truly functions in its steps.
And we will go into it and into that later.
But what the trick happens in this story, we either forget or completely rewrite.
So, that unity precedes enemy.
Ontologically, unity precedes enemy.
Ontologically, identity precedes sin.
Like, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So, and that makes very particular conclusions that unity is not a contract.
That is the third, which has got out of the picture.
Like, that's very interesting way.
It's said in America, like it is endowed by the creator, but it's not clear why creator, who created this classical Lockean paradigm.
Whereas in truth, like any unity is a manifestation of heavenly unity.
And then we can start building trust.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
We could say something like true unity versus, I've used the word society, but we could say, what's the other one?
What is that which is tempted together?
Aggregate.
Aggregate.
Yes.
So, you have a unity and you have an aggregate.
So, we have this other principle we keep running into, which is something like.

**SPK_1:**
It looks like unity, but it doesn't have the spirit of unity.

**SPK_0:**
Right.
Exactly.
And it might be good enough for right now.
Yeah.
Might be even better.
Might be even better for right now.
So, we have this question of speed.

**SPK_1:**
Yes.
Let's not use better.
It must be more efficient.
Yes.
Or speedier.

**SPK_0:**
Yes.
Yeah.
And these are these.
So, it's interesting this.
It's funny to say that these are all part of the Gnostic civilization problem.
Yes.
All these different principles.
So, we're sort of pulling them out and noticing.

**SPK_1:**
Because you notice how they underpin each other.
It's not, like they are in any.
That's the thing.
They make a weird form of a punity, but they all unify.
Because you can start from any pros.
Nice.
Again, let's do this.
This is a trick I did in the beginning.
If deal is trust, or code is law, or deal, like all these things.
If this is the truth, then knowledge is power.
Knowledge how to make a good deal.
Knowledge how to trick somebody.
Knowledge how to be a crook and not a moron in a deal.
Goes back and forth.
Yeah.
But biting in its tail.
And we will come to biting and like.
Can we do this?

**SPK_0:**
Let's go from, let's go from deal.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.

**SPK_0:**
To world is broken.

**SPK_1:**
Okay.
Let's go from, deal from world is broken.
So, here already we are starting seeing a circle appearing.
Not a spiral, not a hierarchy, but a circle.

**SPK_0:**
A serpent eating its own tail, perhaps.
Exactly.

**SPK_1:**
Because, so in this context, how it becomes already at this stage self-contradictory.
And that's why it's, when you keep them all together, the contradiction shines.
So, you start with, the deal is trust.
So, my knowledge about how to be a crook in the deal, is my power.
To gain, how I gain this knowledge?
Through, through reason.
There is a whole sciences of good deals and managements.
And stuff, disciplines, university departments.

**SPK_0:**
Sure.
Yeah, yeah.

**SPK_1:**
In this particular example.
So, back to the reason.
But, if I'm with the power to be always a crook, which I achieved through my beautiful merit alone, one way or another.
It can be even reasonable merit.
It can be a cult merit.
Doesn't matter, but it's my.
Then, that's, the way I'm chosen.
That's the way I'm saved.
And if I'm saved, well, that means, I'm in a position, to do whatever I, want.
Well, and part of this, to do what I want, is to fix things around me.
Yeah, I want to, as you said, the imperative.
If I'm so powerful and knowledgeable, and always on top, well, they don't know how to do it.
I know how to do it.
Then, they don't want to do it fittingly.
Well, I will sign a deal with them, how to do it.
And then, we will fix this broken world, which I'm still deep in my heart, not happy with, for some reason.
I don't know.

**SPK_0:**
Nice.
So, the movement, the key movement here, is this notion of the necessity, of becoming something, like the savior.
It's a beautiful little turn.
It's a beautiful turn.

**SPK_1:**
But it cannot come, because you're still a human.

**SPK_0:**
I'm not a crook.

**SPK_1:**
What do you mean,

**SPK_0:**
I'm not a crook?
I'm a savior.

**SPK_1:**
Perfect example.
Yeah.

**SPK_0:**
It's very, very, very powerful, because, hmm, that's very powerful.
I'm not a crook.
I use the power that I have accrued, for the benefit of those around me.
For the world.
For the whole world.

**SPK_1:**
They don't even see the whole world.
They are too trapped in their everyday struggles.
But I can see the whole world.

**SPK_0:**
Yeah.

**SPK_1:**
I have the knowledge.

**SPK_0:**
Mm-hmm.
I feel convicted.

**SPK_1:**
The deal is appealing.
What can one say?
It is appealing on a surface.
But there is one big lie, and just like, I will say it just for the spirit's sake.
The problem with any deal of this sort is that you are the moron.
And the real crook is the spirit behind the deal.

**SPK_0:**
This is very important.
Okay.
