# Patterns of Political Community. Conversation with @JonathanPageau

Jun 22, 2024 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIpyBPd84gM) 01:22:16

I present to your attention an interview with a man who probably needs no introduction, the most profound Western symbolist of our time, Orthodox iconographer,
creator of the Symbolic World project - Jonathan Pageau.

For me, this is the most voluminous conversation about the most basic issues underlying the matter of my study - political philosophy.
We discussed a wide range of topics: from the end of the Enlightenment to the return of Universal History;
from the dreams of Thomas Hobbes and their fruits to the hopes and failures of the Modernity.

**P.Shchelin:**
hello dear audience today it is a true special day for our channel we have a most wonderful guest a man who needs no introduction the one who basically revived and mass symbolic thinking in the west jonathan pedro

**J.Pageau:**
thank you it's nice to meet you problem

**P.Shchelin:**
and uh so today we have a quite a huge i would say broad list of topics we would want to talk about they will talk about problems of identity political community international order but where we want to start i think is one of the most basic elements of what's happening what is playing out in front of our eyes and i've been entertained the thought that all main let's say paradigms of thinking like liberalism communism ethno-nationalism which seems to be self-evident which seems to be dominant in the modern political discourse are in fact just the brothers uh fighting over that killed their own father of enlightenment and now they're just effectively trying over its inheritance and over its uh dead body since you made a lot of videos about this topic I would maybe like you to elaborate on like to say whether it's an overstretch or maybe it's not a deep enough understanding of the process

**J.Pageau:**
yeah well it depends on what angle you want to look at and so one of the aspects so the enlightenment obviously is a very broad it's a very broad event uh but one of the aspects of the enlightenment is related to let's say rationalism or to the creation of this of scientific processes or in some ways the fine-tuning of those processes and also making that type of thinking the analytical type of thinking uh you could say making it the mode of being that is preferred maybe that's a good way of saying it and you know that leads downstream to many things that you know when we look at them we find very positive like it increases obviously the capacity to quantify, to name and to predict phenomena, and therefore it leads to the type of scientific progress that we have seen.
But if you take that as a mode of thinking, that's a way of, you have to understand that you can't avoid the corollaries of that type of thinking.
So if you have an analytic mode of thinking where you try to create strong identities that you then analyze and predict, you create these, You know, so it does things like, for example, the creation of encyclopedias, right, the creation of dictionaries, all of this type of attitude where we want to fix the phenomena, define it, create a very strong boundary around it so we can analyze it, predict it and all that.
Well, that has corollaries, which are the problem, for example, of nation states.
So nation states are born out of that thinking.
ethnic divisions the way that we think of them in the modern age are also born out of that division because just like we want to identify species of animals in order to analyze them and and look at their behaviors we do the same with humans and we do the same with nations so instead of having you know broad empires with Fuzzy borders and, you know, and kind of no man's land and ambiguous spaces.
We want to have nations with clear imaginal lines, you know, and we create maps and we have maps that are, you know, the ancient maps were basically just cosmic descriptions of relations of large, you know, like.
And so if you look at the T-map, for example, in the Middle Ages, it's basically just Europe, Africa, Asia in a flower pattern.
And it has very little to do with the type of analytic thinking that we apply to the world now.
And like you said, what happens is that has corollaries, which is all the modern political movements are in some ways downstream from that, whether it is the libertarian.
who wants to be completely autonomous and free from all relationship to other beings, or whether it is the ethno-nationalist that wants to segregate himself and create this really tight, clear identity border around their identity, or whether it is the communist that in some ways is actually strangely akin to the libertarian, though with a different strategy.
So you can see the downstream from this type of thinking, you have all kinds of problems or political solutions that, although they fight amongst themselves, like you mentioned at the introduction, they are in some ways, not only in some ways, they are just fruits of the same origin.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, you brought so many points, which I would like to elaborate.
I guess I will start with a quick point.
I really liked your idea of borders, because I think it's one of the most fascinating element of modern reality when people treat borders as something both sacred fixed and natural whereas historically there have been never any of these three things effectively all borders in history are frontiers they're constantly moving they might not be completely flexible but they're it's always a movable line like there is I think maybe one or few borders in the world which like lasted for hundreds of years and it's something like between border between a small Duke of And I think that's kind of the core weakness of rationalist thinking, which I think we can address it now, that it tries to freeze time.
All of this kind of...
process all of these ideologies they try to freeze time so let's say we find the perfect mapping of some of a moment being at the end of history of Fukuyama or like liberal end of history communist and then let's freeze it it won't go any further it nothing will ever happen so let's freeze these borders and when you ask the most simple question why these borders so why no movement then it falls apart like it just falls apart

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, because if you ask the question, let's say in terms of nationalism, let's say the nationalism is that developed very strongly at the beginning of the late 19th, early 20th century.
You ask yourself, oh, OK, so does that mean that now this is it forever?
Like you said, like we're just going to keep these lines forever and you can see it like in some ways there is a sense in which if you want to understand.
Like if you want to understand, let's say.
where the political movement is you can see you have to just have to look at where the borders are absolute and unquestionable and where the borders are all of a sudden treated as completely arbitrary and ridiculous.
And as if not all the borders are actually have the same characteristic.
But when you look at political movements, you can notice that when all of a sudden they start to treat certain borders as arbitrary and ridiculous, you think, oh, okay, now I see where the wind is shifting.
I can kind of see.
But like you said, what's interesting about that is in some ways, the postmodern reaction to the modern thinking is in some ways a...
a realization that identities have fuzziness right that identities have hybridity that identities produce these intermediary states that the modern rationalist wants to eliminate but you can't completely eliminate and so they they you could say that if you try to eliminate the fuzziness then it at some point it it has revenge on you because you you build it up in the in the borders then at some point it overwhelms the identity you can't you can't avoid it forever

**P.Shchelin:**
i absolutely agree this revenge of the fuzziness it's a great phrase i will i might borrow because that is a paradox like those people who like i find it quite often mostly right now and this i don't know how to call this movement let's say anti-gnostic anti-marxist movement in the west which is doing like quite a lot of good of educational work and it's remarkable but they keep missing this core element like at least most of them that what they're fighting against it's the consequences of the actions of their heroes it's like you brought it upon yourself and that's a very that's why i started the conversation from enlightenment because as you said so once you see a political community as something quantifiable named predictable rationalized you will end up in those areas like then you will have this revenge of a business and then just those who do it better than you will start eating you but it's still in fighting as long as you don't address this foundational stones that political communities are neither quantifiable and predictable they're quite different in their nature

**J.Pageau:**
yeah and and i don't it's very difficult to see how we're going to solve the problem because it's like once you start to crystallize things right right once you start to make these these imaginal lines and you start to create because imagine a line has no space between it So if you want to, let's say, I mean, I'm talking about nations, but you can use this for any type of category, right?
Imagine a lion has no fuzziness.
And therefore, who's going to give?
Like, how are you going to recreate that fuzziness when the imagine a lion is there?
It means that you're looking at war all the time.
You're looking at at least the potential idea of war all the time because you've got these lines that are, you don't have the kind of hybrid.
a hybrid buffer between the empire that you would have, for example, between the Roman and the Persian empire, you know, for example.
So it's a, it's a problematic thing.
And so therefore what happens is the dream of abolishing the borders becomes almost necessary.
So that's why it sounds contradictory, but the rationalism and the desire to, you know, the, let's say the analytic mode of creating all these nation states.
it ultimately also leads to a dream of a one world government.
Like it leads to the dream of something like communism, where the borders all dissolve, because the problem of the borders is a real problem.
And if you ignore it, then you have World War I, and you have World War II.
And it's like, these are issues that, the idea that that went away, it's like, we're not going to have that again.
It's so completely ridiculous as we see now.
But then there's a dream of saying, well, then we should have all the borders dissolved, right?
So this is the funny thing about, you know, the movement of the Enlightenment and the movement of modernism is that because of its dialectical structure, right, it tends to do that.
And that's in some ways, I think that's one thing that people like Hegel and Marx intuited rightly, you know, that process is in some ways inevitable for...

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah as long as you have this foundation it is inevitable i think that and and it's but it's very hard to identify the foundation

**J.Pageau:**
with the false foundation oh for sure it is a false

**P.Shchelin:**
foundation yeah it is but it became so natural it became self-evident and that's why we're having conversation like this to just effectively an exercise of as a way of thinking or like trying to identify this foundation as not self-evident that it is not like how it is or how it always been and your example of like historical borders roman empire like it's very interesting and core example this whole idea of margin flu this whole idea of fluidity on the border but we need to understand that this fluidity the disappearance of this fluidity exactly hasn't always been like you know a natural process of dying out again we cannot avoid talking about a political actor like a political subject a political sovereign who deliberately wanted to destroy this Imperial fluidity and I think I will I won't talk about it then but I will I guess offer it right now the way I see the hierarchy of political communities and the way we see it nowadays and then where the kind of trick happens so in my idea is in my understanding on the bottom lies a classer in a broad scheme of things like you can call it a political community any local community but it is effectively a community everybody knows that everybody supposedly love it like all this um productive multiplicity creative multiplicity not oppressive multiplicity like a church that's why i think a class is the best way of describing it

**J.Pageau:**
a class you said

**P.Shchelin:**
A church, no, a church.
A church, yeah, okay.
A church, sorry, a church.
And then on a second level of, let's say, imagination, nowadays we are supposed to have something like nation-state.
Historically, it hasn't always been the case.
It can be called like a kingdom, but so something of this level of analysis, like something that unites many classes together, but it's big enough.
big enough to act in history, something big enough to act enough as a sovereign.
And then there is a third level of imperium, let's say, of empire.
There's something which is truly unifying and like...
is much stronger than all of those like kingdoms on their own and what we and the version of history which should say we are usually taught in the history books and was people to understand is empire is evil and oppressive and it oppresses this local communities locally classes but in my opinion it's a trick because actually its empire and ecclesia which are usually way more in a flexible if you read history books you will see how much flexibility how much gray zoning how much borderlining like it allows but what is the true ally is a nation state or let's say a small kingdom and what is even above an empire this tower of babel what i called or a globalist or a communist dream so alliance is happening between the steps but we keep but most people keep missing the structure and that's why they think that nation state for example is an ally of local community whereas historically nation state has never been an ally of local community historically all nation states are literally created on a bones and blood of local communities but they're sold in a history version as uh on the contrary something which fights to protect the local community from an oppressive empire whereas the true master is kind of states on the shade and it is this idea of tower of bible world without no borders so and that's what i think the paradox we're in and that's why it's hard to have a conversation because people rarely see this whole structure at least the way i encounter maybe you see it yeah

**J.Pageau:**
well I maybe I see I probably see it a little differently from you in the sense that the way that I see it is that what you have is you basically have you you need to have units that fit into other units right we all know that that's the way that you can't function that's the best way to function and that's the traditional way to function you know the ancient way to function you had to have things like family clans you know villages in like you said kingdoms or sometimes kingdoms that even had had uh you know aristocracies that were like local fiefs or whatever and then you move up into the kingdom uh and and then that let's say that that kingdom can become a part of a of an empire uh like we saw during the roman empire or the you know obviously there are different forms of empire even the muslim empire or um And so that has been for, I mean, since the Bronze Age, you could say, the traditional way of things to lay themselves out.
And it's almost inevitable that we do it that way.
The problem seems to arise to me when any of those level tries to subjugate the one under it, that is, tries to swallow it into itself.
And so you can understand it with the bureaucratic nation state.
The bureaucratic nation state is a good example because we live in it.
We experience it where the state begins to see itself as protecting individuals from the intermediary structures.
So it's like, oh, we need to protect children from parents.
We need to protect children and people from the church.
We need to protect people from clubs.
And so you see all these stories, which are obviously inevitable, of abuse in families, abuse in clubs, abuse in churches, all these things.
And it's like, oh, the state will protect.
us and then what happens is you start to level the you start to level the the intermediary structures and then you create a kind of individual state relationship and that is corrosive like it's corrosive to the identity of the person uh and it's and it ends up ultimately making the state into a form of tyranny even without anybody willing it particularly because it has to take up in its own authority has to take up all those intermediary levels which which are not necessarily natural for it to do so now the problem is that technology makes that possible in a way that in an ancient empire you simply could not have done that right it's like the king could have said i want to control everybody in my empire but all right how are you going to do it because you don't have the reach to do it So technology makes that possible, and it makes it possible to dream, like you said, like we talked about, and I think a lot of people are kind of naturally moving towards that, to dream of a universal state, where now the globalist states will protect us from our nation state.
You know, that's the way that it's presented.
It's like, oh, those horrible, dangerous ethno-nation states that are, you know, that are xenophobic and they're all these things and we accuse them and they do all these things that are only for their own interest.
We need a global interest.
We need something that serves everyone.
And so we're going to create this global structure that with technology will be capable of managing individuals here.
I mean, that is the most, like you said, that's the most corrosive thing ever.
for tower that is

**P.Shchelin:**
the same pattern it's absolutely the same pattern and it preys upon the same mistake because it's the way you've been describing like to protect individual effectively against its community but here is the lies of false contradictions because i would agree even now like subconsciously to an extent we are still relatively healthy, we leave a community.
People don't leave as individual.
We say we do leave as individual.
We do claim we leave as individual, but we don't really.
We always leave in the community.
We always leave as something which is bigger than the sum of its parts.
The sum can never be properly quantifiable, but as you said, the very manner that the state treats an individual.
like let's say as something as exists on its own this famous uh empty board of law basically it's i think it's coming from effectively local hopes like effectively in in more in one way of thinking but exactly the same pattern is so let's just take this nation states as individual units which historically they are not and then let's devoid them of all other things and then exactly use this bigger authority to protect again now individuals against the state but it is the same pattern and until stop thinking about reality in terms of individuals, which I think is a really huge challenge, it's really hard to start seeing the other way of potential coexisting.
It's a little bit problematic.

**J.Pageau:**
I don't know if you read, maybe you haven't read, but I wrote a paper last year for ARC on subsidiarity.
And in some ways, for me, this has been the thing that I want to bring about.
Because I'm not a very political person in my engagements like publicly i i'm political privately like also in my own state but uh you know i've been wanting to help people see that this subsidiary model as the most natural model and how in some ways the false opposition right because one of the issues with the classical liberal is that they're they they tend to push towards the individual and the sovereignty of the individual but they don't realize that as you push towards the sovereignty of the individual, even though you don't like it, you're necessarily making the power of the state more and more necessary because you need something to fill in the subsidiary gaps of alignment, right?
That are little communities and all these things that fit together to create something that is more akin to a natural system.
So you have this opposition, right?
Where the individual becomes more and more free in parenthesis, and then the state becomes more and more powerful necessarily.
And that's why like...
That's why the strange coalition between rainbow coalition stuff and globalism.
How do these two things fit together?
They completely fit together.
As you move towards idiosyncrasy, then you need the state.
The idiosyncrasy becomes more and more pervasive and therefore we need someone to protect all of us from each other.
Because now we all hate each other.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's the same.
ideal in this idiosyncratic moment we have this famous you know panopticon image the one eye in the middle and every single individual in its own cell like that's the most famous image of uh that's what how where it cannot not go like there is no way of going it but kind of i think our audience knows it and i just want i guess to highlight the things which lead to this and i think we mentioned one important question in this paper or in some other of your conversation, which liberals often don't get, they consider any subsidiary arbitrary, and it's not.
Subsidiaries are not arbitrary.
And if you treat individual as a primary element of analysis, then it has to be arbitrary.
Then every subsidiary has to be arbitrary, but it's not.
And then you run into the problem you just described.

**J.Pageau:**
you know the the modern scientist type should be able to perceive this is that that it's it really is like natural systems the way that society functions because what you have is you have cells and those cells like they exist for the unity of a being right they don't only just exist on their own and so individuals have a level of existence but individuals don't exist without families they just don't exist they have no They have no way of being without being in interrelation with other people.
And so you necessarily need all of this to stack up, right?
That's the best way to see it.
And it's the most natural way for the world to exist.
It imitates all kinds of natural systems that we see in biology.
And if you're not careful, you create the problem of fragility.
Which is exactly what globalism does.
Because it was funny, because of all people, I remember I saw an interview with Elon Musk, like somewhere in Saudi Arabia or something, some weird thing, where they were asking Elon Musk, like, we need a global government.
Like, we need to move.
And Elon Musk was saying, no, you can't.
Because if you do that, then you just have one thing.
And if it falls, then everything falls.
You actually do need several empires and multiplicity because...
if one of them starts to decay then the other one will take up the space and you have this you have like a natural competition that doesn't necessarily have to just be seen as warring but rather as really like i said like natural systems and so if you only have one way of doing thing and only one pyramid if that pyramid starts to to shake then that's it then you have actually have you have an apocalypse you have an armageddon everything falls apart because

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah i agree ultimately but yeah this idea of competition of different it's also just as any subsidiary model especially in terms of political then you understand that there is a healthy limit to it like under certain moments there is a natural limit to it let's say that's why i'm talking let's say an empire is a natural limit of a particular subsidiarity yes any empire has this element of global universality i admit coming back from roman empire which considered to be the empire of the world as we know it but it's exactly more like an aspiration historically it's impossible for any political empire to become a true one global empire their ambition if anything is good because it makes them like to be better to exactly this whole this element of competition which um rationalists like but they never really ascribe to become this one controlling uh prison guardian which uh world government inevitably has uh to lean forward

**J.Pageau:**
but but in some ways we have to be the problem that we have the roman empire i i think i agree what you're saying completely but we have a problem now which is that now we have technology that actually makes it possible.
So the Roman Empire couldn't.
Like you said, their aspiration to be in some ways the global empire, you know that it was limited by their reach, and when they overreached, they paid the price for it because they basically overreached their capacity to actually control these things.
And then the mercenaries that they were using to continue to increase their...
their their uh like reach finally said well i don't align with you i might as well just be a thing and now attack you know towards the inside but with this is the problem that technology makes it technology and ai and all these things make a global government actually possible uh you know because you know you don't need mercenaries you just need robots like i mean i know that that sounds you just need drones like you just need to have drones fly over everybody you know just kill it you just blow up a few houses once in a while to remind people we're watching you like an absolute authoritarian world government is yeah i don't know if it's possible but at least the dream of it is far more like the dream that people have of it is is closer than what the romans or the persians had access to

**P.Shchelin:**
I see what you mean and yeah it is definitely closer but I think here is a completely different pattern which is on our side I actually don't remember this line in English but do you remember when Mary praises the Lord in the second chapter of Luke praises the Lord and says that he dispersed the arrogant with the intention of it of their hearts i see i'm translating so maybe in english it sounds slightly different but i think that's effectively the same element which will happen in this story so their own they won't be defeated by this this idea to create an a the total idea secrecy on the tower of bible level and we can actually now talk a little bit about it as a symbol because i think it's a perfect example it's a very complexity of the structure the very arrogance of the structure will be root of its own demise it won't be the root device of like let's say control revolutionary movement no no revolutionary movement when defeat this tower but it will collapse on its own that's what i think will happen but until then

**J.Pageau:**
we have an example of it right which is the soviet the soviet empire collapsed on its own it's not like you know it although there they were you know, Americans and other people were trying to influence or were trying to do things in order to kind of bring it down.
But it didn't, like you said, come up with a counter-revolutionary movement.
It basically just petered out because the amount of control that it exercised of centralization was not sustainable and created lack of alignment fractally, right?
So, you know, this is also the problem with the, it's already the problem with the nation state, which is that it's their responsibility.
It's not me.
I'm just a taxpayer, a consumer.
I'm not actually a member of a body.
I don't feel allegiance in the way that I care for my family.
I have an abstract allegiance, maybe.
And the only way that people are able to reawaken the...
allegiance to a state is war, right?
And so you have wars.
Oh, now we're together.
Now we're this people and now we're going to fight this other people.
But if you have a global government, what are you going to do?
I guess you need aliens.
You need extraterrestrials, like you need alien enemies or something.
Because then you just have basically just going to fall apart because nobody is going to feel.

**P.Shchelin:**
But that's why actually you can you bring this for the second time.
You wrote the question before and now I will indulge myself because.
speaking of like the theory for is one of my favorite topics to discuss honestly and it is not coincidental because actually the question of war is the question of this whole sovereignty because ironically if a state being at a nation state or an empire nation an empire state is not allowed to wage war then it's not the ones that hold the power like like it or not but historically it's the right to wage war is the political right and when we after world war ii create created this uh ape of United Nations which says no there will be no Wars like and like Wars are illegal we don't allow any Wars you can't exactly created the foundation for this next step and then why do you need States at all in a way on top of it you created the gigantic problem of hypocrisy because if you look into once again if you look into real history there was wars we just don't call them this way anymore like that's the most ironic thing like people often like it's it's remarkable that there is no wars like like what united states is in iraq it's not war what is happening between russia and ukraine right now it's not war legally it's not war and like there was no wars like for the last 70 years and it's kind of this example of this clown world you're talking about

**J.Pageau:**
yeah but we're not idiots like you know we're not we're not i think that i think that if we're having this conversation we're not neither review either of us are the type of person that just listens to the drivel that comes out of the official sources and the same but it

**P.Shchelin:**
is important i would agree this is important why even those in power don't call it why i think that there is an actual important seed in it because they don't treat themselves as properly sovereign and that so i i guess it to me it's a sign that a certain shift towards the bible has already happened like and it's happened like 70 years ago on a very fundamental level i guess so that was my

**J.Pageau:**
that's an interesting idea i never thought of that like it's an interesting idea to say that the fact that that nation states For example, the United States have basically been at war since World War II, nonstop.
The Korean War, the Vietnam War, they've been at war without end.
But the fact that nobody wants to actually call it war, that is an interesting idea.
Like you said, it means that even though it's hypocritical, it means that somehow everyone has accepted that the capacity to wage war is no longer justifiable in any way.
There's no justification for it.
We do name wars, right?
We do call them wars, but it's not the people, the powerful agents, they tend to avoid it.

**P.Shchelin:**
uh it's gray zone it's always fluid it's war on terror it's a culture war it's uh like something else but yeah it's not

**J.Pageau:**
but we say we do say vietnam war like we do say korean war we do say the people they do say the war in iraq although i i that's a colloquial term but for sure in the united states i don't think the us has voted for war I don't forget.

**P.Shchelin:**
Historically, as you know, it was a very clear act called Declaration of War.
It is a document.
Historically, you needed to declare that the country, even in World War II, you can look like, for example, Britain declaring war on Germany.
There is an official saying that since 12 p.m.
this day, we are in a state of war.
That's what I mean.
And this is gone.
like yeah yeah completely

**J.Pageau:**
for sure now it's it's very it's gone and and also because the it a lot of it has to do with the way that that that america considers itself like its own self-identity identity and the manner in which it it wages it's constantly waging war for its interests but it it also um masks it in the interest of the people that they fight where they fight you know and In some ways, sometimes I've always wondered if that is also a kind of remainder of a veneer of Christianity, right?
This veneer of Christianity where we feel like we have to say, no, we're going in Iraq because we want to help the Iraqis.
We're going in Syria because we want to help the Syrians, which is a very strange way of doing war.
But it seems, like you said, to be the way that at least the modern West...
does war.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's not just, but I can tell you, it's not just the West.
It generally became a global paradigm.
I guess you can argue that the United States may be one of the first who really cemented this model in their actions.
And this is a very interesting story and so on.
For an outsider, the United States is definitely a very interesting case because, based on my conversation, I actually believe Americans when they say these things.
The problem is it doesn't change the fact that what they are doing actually doing is a normal historical power struggle etc etc you perceive it as a benevolent let's say acting in this realm of ideas and care but it doesn't change the fact that it is what it is in reality but there is this very interesting gap which creates with as here comes a big difference between the americans perceive themselves and the rest of the world specifically but um it's just very interesting uh topic but let's come back a little bit because yeah

**J.Pageau:**
yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
unfortunately it's fascinating so i like i just want to to come back to i think the issue of um cornerstone issues so uh because we talked about it like um uh different elements how it's not working so let's talk a little bit how it works to be a little bit more positive and one of the quotes of yours from one of again your videos which i loved it a lot like about what is a political community and the quote is that mysticism happens every time you encounter unity in the world and for me then there is a question so is it a who not a world not a what or if that holds a political community together so it is mystical in nature and i guess i wanted to maybe you to why

**J.Pageau:**
is it mystical in nature so I mean I think like you said like when you quoted it that you have to understand that the mysticism of the experience of unity it happens you know way lower than the political sphere right it happens every time you you perceive unity because that because the qualities of the unit right like we say the whole is more than the than the parts right that something that has a unit unitary identity cannot be the the multiplicity of it the parts of it cannot account for the quality of its unity right that's what they call emergence you know whatever like that word that people use um but that is true at every level that we perceive unity and then it's true as a person and so the unity of the person right the fact that i have oh a unity cannot be accounted for and like my brain is a bunch of things going off my body is a bunch of things doing things but nonetheless i i have a a push towards unity within me and that is the soul right we don't like using that word the spirit then there's a sense in which it's the place where and so that is necessary for all multiplicity to join into one and so you can understand now like why families for example like that families in many cultures will have things like they had family gods for example or that they had patron saints or they had this this notion of a kind of guardian angel of the family because we notice the unity of the family coming together and you know we're made of a bunch of people but we can we feel that's just not a feeling but it's it is a capacity to recognize the unity and that scales right it scales into communities into parishes it scales into into uh you know cities like for example in italy during the middle ages it was the city state that was strong where people had or you know even during the hellenistic period people identified with their city their body politic and saw that as a having a common identity but they were still capable of seeing themselves as hellenes as having also higher identity that pulled them together into that type of common space.
And they had ritual ways of acknowledging and participating in that.
And so that keeps on scaling.
And at every level, there's always there's opportunity and danger.
And that's really important.
Like, I think even, you know, when we started the conversation, I wanted to mention that, which is that empire can be horrible.
A nation can be horrible.
Families can be horrible.
and a person can be horrible.
And so it's important to acknowledge that and not to paint a simple rosy picture of these structures.
Julius Caesar bragged that he killed a million Gauls.
He was proud of doing that in order to bring them into the empire.
So these are horrible acts that all of these levels of power do, but they also at the same time offer opportunities which are real and should not be denied as well.
You know, and we shouldn't say, well, just so the Roman Empire killed all these people.
So it's horrible.
The answer is yes.
But also the Roman Empire provided communication and peace amongst these people, you know, at the same time.
So we have to be able to see the good, good and bad of all these.

**P.Shchelin:**
And you need to judge the historical story.
It's just because like before, like I think three decades before Julius started his whole crusade, not crusade, whole.
like invasion in the goal as the goals came to rome and almost destroyed the rome so like it's it's it's it's not like you know there is a no it's not a one-way find a good peaceful guy in history basically you won't find a good guy who was just you know innocent uh peace-loving community which like no the moment you step into history you will do things which yeah yeah it's good it's good yeah so just sorry

**J.Pageau:**
i agree i agree now i don't i don't want to i don't want to like i said i don't want to paint either way as being right i just want to show that it's important to understand that but not so nonetheless what what happens is there is a type of mystical unity which is exhilarating and this is important for people to understand it it's exhilarating because you just like when you're in a sports team And all of a sudden you feel this unity, right?
You're working together and you're winning the game.
And all of a sudden you feel this kind of sense of being elated into the identity.
And again, that provides opportunity, but it also provides danger.
I mean, it's like you can weaponize that in crazy ways, which we saw in the modern nation state.

**P.Shchelin:**
Exactly.
But OK, then just let's talk a little bit more about this danger, because I think it's one of the things we're missing in our...
modern conversation is the distinguishing between two types of danger and i think a lot of let's say misunderstanding and manipulation happens here so one uh danger is in my in my understanding you can call it natural and yes i will reference christianity is just the consequences of sin sorry there is there is a danger in sin and as you said an individual family nation state etc etc etc it's uh uh the danger of uh i would call it you can call it natural entropy or basically something can go wrong all the time you are not perfect nothing is ever really perfect and uh one of the russian philosophers nikolai berzeev has this very i think important to hear now phrase that the purpose of a state is not to create heaven on earth it's not to let it devolve in hell

**J.Pageau:**
like so yeah yeah yeah so

**P.Shchelin:**
And you can argue it's also a pattern.
The point of yours is not to create heaven and earth.
It's not to let your soul in hell.
The point of the family is not to create, let's say, literally create heaven and earth.
But where manipulation happens, if we forget looking about this, admitting the...
And that comes with rationalism and enlightenment because it kind of destroyed it.
If we forget to accept that we are limited.
And we do forget because we consider us first progressive.
And then we consider us to being this humanist man who is way better than everybody who has ever been before.
History really started with us.
Before us, there was only darkness.
We are the light which come.
And then, sorry, that is the basic pattern of thinking.
Then you leave no room for imperfection.
Then you leave no room for imperfection into anything.
And then you have to look to any authority figure to precisely...
destroys the imperfections which you are still witnessing because they are natural but you cannot accept their natural cause so you have to ascribe them exclusively to human-made causes like those other causes you if anything create causes which explains the imperfections around itself and that's one big conundrum happening and then of course there is a second kind of you are talking about that there is an element of potential corruption in any structure if you effectively turn it to the wrong purpose that's another thing but they are different things but if you can at least address the second you can because we can talk about what is a good purpose what is the good dealers what is good what is so we can talk about it and maybe we can yeah try to through you know transforming the hearts education talking because it's very interesting that for the most part of history the political treaties and machiavelli was the one who broke the traditions they were not about how it works and how to gain power but what kind of person we need in power so what kind of heart should be that they make the decisions so how we educate the say the sovereign the monarch etc etc and we can talk about it so how not to let him to dissolve into this tyranny but it's not the conversation we are having the real conversation we are having is this uh labyrinth of fighting against imperfections which are irreducible and I think that was completely missed.

**J.Pageau:**
I think that's a great point.
This is an interesting moment that I had because I had a taxi driver, a Moroccan man, a nice guy living in Canada talking about COVID after COVID was over and saying just how horrible it was in Morocco because in Morocco they didn't do anything like they didn't have mass they didn't have all this stuff and and i'm like listening to the guy and i asked him i said was there a difference in death toll in morocco and canada he said no not really like was there a difference in in the in the if and he's like no not really and i said and i was like so what's the problem he said well at least they managed it and it was like that's the thing it's this idea that What are you going to do?
There's an imperfection in the system and this weird idea, like you said, that somehow we have this weird idea that now the state has to fill up this imperfection with its authority for the simple fact that the imperfection exists, which is insane because it leads to this kind of Tower of Babel thinking.
you know, the natural way of being would say to say, yeah, that's right.
You're right.
People die and people get sick and bad things happen.
And that part of life, you know, and if we want the state to cover every single bad thing that happens, we are setting ourselves up for tyranny.
Like it's going to happen.
You can't avoid the corollaries of that authority in your life.

**P.Shchelin:**
but also not just i think that's important to highlight it's exactly the pattern let's say if you want your family to cover up for any imperfection which you have on your own it's the same problem it's the same

**J.Pageau:**
problem you're right no you're exactly right that's that's the right way to think about it but even in your will like you have the same problem inside you which is that if you try to could if you try without like the guidance of a spiritual father or someone helping you, if you try to get rid of all your sins, you are in serious danger, my friend, because you're going to run right into a wall.
It's like people who try to establish crazy disciplines.
Or dieting, for example.
Like, oh, I have this problem.
I'm going to diet like crazy.
And then you meet them a year later and they've gained another 30 pounds because they collapsed.

**P.Shchelin:**
And they are unhappy.
The only difference is they are now also very unhappy.
Exactly.
Because they failed to achieve what they...

**J.Pageau:**
They failed and they're unhappy.
Yeah.
No, that's a good point.
That's a good point of the idea that in some ways to understand the state of the fall and to understand the need to acknowledge...
imperfection so you know you know there's this tradition in late middle ages it was called the nine worthies i don't know if you know about this political tradition so basically it was they you know the the thinkers in in the late middle ages had identified nine characters in history that were important and in some ways models so three from the pagan past three from the old testament uh and then three from the modern like the modern for the medieval era right and what they would do is they would say something like alexander right alexander is a great man he's a one of the worthies and they would say here are the great things he did and here are his sins and they would do that for all the characters and it was like now we have this weird idea right we can't we can't stomach imperfection in even our historical figures and so you see that in america people like tearing down statues because someone wasn't jesus basically it's like oh he wasn't god so we have to destroy everything like every memory of them because they they weren't perfect which is which is nuts

**P.Shchelin:**
well i think here happening like super trick honestly but like first thing it's not just about this nine worthy tradition i've just like i'm running a class on plutarch like from like my projects and then they read plutarch like whenever you read any description of person like it's it's full of imperfection like it's worth it to and that's the way people understood history actually For the most part of our existence, we understood history as stories.
And that was very clear.
It's a story of a nation.
It's a story of a person.
Of course, it will have failures.
It can have successes and failures.
Nobody expects perfection from anything.
And we learn from it.
That's an important thing.
We learn from it.
in this situation he did this so maybe if the similar pattern arises in your life you know you are not the first one who encountered it this way of thinking is completely lost to us uh but it's not on but again it's kind of this whole idea of freeze of time the nature of time because we simultaneously exactly we are the light before us was darkness like that's the basic pattern of thinking like nobody can think about past and anything but darkness but and people think that's why we're judging the past from the lenses of the present but i actually think there is a trick happening and maybe you didn't hear like here's what he will say that it's not like just with judging past uh from the perspective of a present we are protecting our present from being judged through the eyes of our past i think there is this trick happening because how how how it looks in practical would you rather have your politician be like uh i don't know who is who was i don't know great canadian parliamentarian of the 19th century so you're not familiar but a person but point being or your modern politician yeah think about it yeah yeah the standards read the speeches read the language like simply read the speeches the way they speak in parliament in 19th century like even in the 19th century not going let's say in the medieval but just read the way they speak and read the way it's it is spoken now like don't i i think this anger towards the past it's not just the anger towards imperfections towards the past it's mostly anger towards that we are not we subconsciously know we are not really better than our past but our whole let's say political theology is centered around it that it was wrong and now we discovered the key how it must be done and etc etc etc so many many things are playing out i think it's not just one directional story

**J.Pageau:**
basically yeah i think that's a really interesting insight you know because in some ways there it's a it's a yeah it's a faint right it's like it's like actually a weird faint where we are actually much worse than than the ancients and we're more more stupid like you know the citizenry is less involved less educated and less aware of the issues uh and Even though we're a democracy, it's like we're a democracy, but nobody's aware of any of the issues, at least in our countries, like in Canada and America, we've never discussed any actual political or economic issues.
It's all bluster.
It's just insane.
It's all, it's all just, it's all just like kind of empty political rhetoric.
Our, our prime minister is astounding.
Like Justin Trudeau is amazing.
Like he is, he is a, he is a, he has something to behold because, he can speak for five minutes and then you say, okay, so what did he say?
And you realize he actually, there's no content in his speech.
And he is the prime minister of Canada.
He's not dealing with any of the issues.
He's not giving, he's just saying, as Canadians, we take this seriously and we're going to consider it.
And we know that the Canadians are with us because this is an issue that is important to us.
And he can do that.
in an entire speech and he's actually not saying anything it's it's astounding and you're right i think that's right is is that in some ways this weird contraction of the past like this weird desire to you know make the past as short as possible too this is also something that's happening is that you see that in the united states especially right like the whole slavery question in the united states is funny because people act as if the only thing that exists is the is the the kind of transatlantic slave trade you know in the modern age and that everything about us is related to that but there's nothing around it like there's no history nobody knows anything about any history before before that uh that's a that's a great insight it's an interesting insight about the and it just it like contracts everything into this into this moment and then when you end up having are these really vague idea of progress.

**P.Shchelin:**
Progress, yeah.

**J.Pageau:**
The progress thing is a mystery to me.
It's one of the most mysterious aspects of modern politics because progress necessarily has to be teleological because you have to be able to measure progress towards a purpose.
But the progress that the modern politician talks about or the modern political class talks about is a vague open-ended progress that we don't know actually what it is it's it like it just means something like more is it more equality more

**P.Shchelin:**
it's heaven on earth no i think we know what it is like again we know what it is this progress is heaven on earth right here right now yeah

**J.Pageau:**
all right that's it yeah that's a good that's a good probably a good it's a utopian it's a new utopian vision really

**P.Shchelin:**
But it's always been the case, because actually, like, I don't know if you know about this whole Hobson idea, but the Hobson idea, we kind of keep forgetting where this idea of modern progress is coming from.
And one of it was actual gigantic disillusionment of Europe after the 30 years old war, which started our age.
We live in the age of modernity for like the last 400 years, and it started with 30 years war, just for the audience who might not be aware.
And it was devastating.
and people were really like really devastated like and thinkers were really devastating it was a despair and despair was in part because the root cause of the 30 years world war 30 years can argue world war was that different versions of heaven been fighting each other and killing each other and they decided okay so it's not so the hops personally that was his idea okay we cannot fight about whose version of heaven is right so let's just put this question outside of the box and let's kind of freeze our eschatological and historical time and this goal of the state is to keep the society effectively frozen until the second coming jesus will come he will solve this problem we don't have to address it but it's impossible not to address it because yeah i'm giving up my card this

**J.Pageau:**
is really this is how hobbes spoke i i mean i don't know he actually had an eschatological aspect to his oh yeah no he

**P.Shchelin:**
he was literally arguing against paul like he's writing his was he was directly paraphrasing paul if our paul has the church gobs has the state he and it's literal like line by line i don't have it right in front of me but maybe the next time or like outside we can talk about it no hopes is it's it's exactly he's deeply theological he's he's a leviathan and you might it fascinating because you are this is the symbolism of leviathan you are discovering right now but it's not arbitrary like it's a it's a very theological it's it's so deeply rooted in christian tradition it's addressing christian tradition and ultimate question he strongly so how do we live we know that there is a second coming but we don't know when so how do we live until this when and he was because previous way of living until this when he saw around himself is like mass murder and he he did he was legitimately terrified traumatized and scared man because he was born on the day the spanish ramada was kind of moving towards uh britain like so all these things were really deeply affected him and he was really trying and his solution was so let's just freeze it Let's just freeze this question.
Let's just pretend they are not important.
Let's just talk about different things.
But as we discussed before, you cannot, because it is the questions.
It is mystical.
Any unity is a mystical unity.
And then you start, like in 100 years, theology coming, taking its revenge, just in its secular form, in the form of French Revolution, and then in the form of Enlightenment.
It's exactly the same manner he was trying to freeze, but he didn't understand it's impossible to freeze.
But we keep pretending it's possible to freeze.
that's that's an interesting

**J.Pageau:**
yeah that's a really that's a that's a that's a definitely an interesting insight and i do think for sure you know that in some ways i mean a lot of the modern political ideas they they have definitely a kind of religious aspect or like the very idea of progress like you said in some ways it is it is a religious it's a weird religious idea and you know this vision of something this like yeah like the heavenly city or something and that it's vague enough so that it can call draw us into it uh but it is this yeah that's fascinating

**P.Shchelin:**
i think honestly that's actually the difference jonathan because uh it's not it's simultaneously vague but the purpose is not to be drawn to it the purpose is to have it here right here right now that's i think that's i think the true even difference with let's say the aquinas project to bring the you know city of god to the city of man and he at least understood it's a process and he didn't expect it to happen like uh immediately and it was yeah a long term and now we have this paradox at the same time it's really vague as you said it's really hard to put in all of the description but we must have it right here right now It is very important to have it right here, right now.
If it's not happening within the next presidential term, we are doomed.
We are doomed.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, but also because the globalists also use apocalyptic environmentalism to fuel the movement.
And it's fascinating to watch how it's interchangeable in their mind.
I don't know how conscious it is where it's like...
It's like there's a relationship in their mind between, let's say, racism and environmentalism.
And they're able to kind of jumble it together as this like social program where we have to be a certain way.
But the vision, I mean, I don't know, because I don't totally, because I'm not a progressive, right?
I can kind of enter into that thinking to some extent.
And I understand some of the reactions, let's say, of the desire for variability.
in a system that's too set right i kind of understand that and i see it but you know the vision the vision that even they have that's ultimately seems to be anti-human and that's what i don't totally like that's what i i think it's satanic in that sense like i i hate the word that use that word to to clear i think it's like a weird trickery like this weird trickery that the liberation from forms of control right is simultaneously creating stronger and stronger forms of control at the same time.
And that ultimately, it actually leads to a desire for the elimination of the human.
It's hard to wrap your head around it, but it seems to be that's the case of what we see happening.

**P.Shchelin:**
I can offer you a way of wrapping it.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, go for it.

**P.Shchelin:**
Sorry.
So two points.
The first is, it's not elimination of control.
uh it's elimination of control where you you are not the controller so it's the whole one of the what unites like radical environmentalists and anti-racism is the hatred towards hierarchy again in that sense they are both the production of hierarchy and that's why they're so that's the connecting point they hate any form of hierarchy and we're coming back to the point it comebacks unfortunately to liberal individualism because if you consider liberal individualism from a scene from a starting point of your thought then any form of hierarchy is imposed on them it's not natural it's not organic so until you get this perfect moment that any form of subsidiarity around you is consciously chosen by you in an absolute free environment with now further external influence then you are not free and they want to be this man they want to be the man that chooses every single form of subsidiary constantly and it's not once and for all but every single moment you can argue it's a little bit schizophrenic but whatever that's how they see it like so the idea is like because you because there is an element of it and I think Jonathan Peterson talks a little bit about it that any name any identity does indeed have a tyrannical element in itself.
The moment you accept certainty upon it, the moment you accept identity upon it, there is an element of control in it.
There is an element something you must surrender to it.
And they don't want to surrender anything.
They want to be the one to whom it is surrendered.
So you see how this trick is working.

**J.Pageau:**
But I don't see how it's related to environmentalism.
And I'll tell you why.
So let's take the LGBT stuff.
that's clear.
Like you can see that that is in some ways, you know, the ultimate liberal act, which is self-determination, self-naming.
I'm actually not even dependent on any form of constraint, even in my body, even social constraint.
Like there's no constraint.
I break open the constraints and I become a rainbow, right?
It's like, it's all multiplicity, right?
And so that's, but then the environmental, thing is a call for absolute control

**P.Shchelin:**
but it's absolute control where we are in church not evil capitalism it's a right this is a power so i told you so the same way it's me who controls my body it should be me who controls the planet not some hierarchical capitalist structure see

**J.Pageau:**
so yeah yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
for them it works i know it's a little bit tricky but it makes sense as long as so is basically the lie is they claim that they want no structures but it's a lie they want the structure with them in control but uh still the whole pattern is that in that sense the true liberation exactly happens from uh any non-arbitrary hierarchy and every arc you should be arbitrary and conscious and like it chosen by me uh chosen by me voluntarily so that's one important thing but I think there is a thing deeper in it and it's connected to what we're talking before and that's my hypothesis but I think it comes very deep to Gnostic tradition to Manichean tradition and it is a confusion of two things I don't know if we have time to talk about it between respect and love and I think that's actually Western thing which could just now spread across the globe because I think especially in the West like it's a very long story how it developed but you as an orthodox can see it uh there is this kind of this weird mixture that something which is not perfect or something which is not worthy of respect is also not worthy of love there is this thing which plays again in the western culture and it is but as we've been talking before because of the sinful nature there is there is constantly a lot of imperfection there is not that much in reality in society which is a true worthy of respect okay there is like a king authority figure somebody who is successful etc etc etc uh but uh it won't be the majority america tries to solve it through like capitalism and everyone with respect but i can straight away say no like many people will be left out many people are left out if the only thing which is lovable is the one it basically if you make love and respect the same then you have so many people left out of both and I think that's where this whole game coming from because then they think so because we want to be loved like everybody wants to be loved etc etc then we have to through society through these different elements to make us worthy but at the same time they're not addressing the core issues that imperfect uh something which is rejected like here is the whole christ figure is coming and he shows that love is for everyone not for just something which is worse than respect you know it says it should respect the poor like in a sense you know societal that you should put them on pedestal but he says you should love them but because this distinction is lost i think that's how the deep seed is coming into their thinking That's why they consider themselves just.
That's why they consider themselves doing the good thing.
That's what kind of...
But it's a hypothesis.

**J.Pageau:**
It's an interesting hypothesis.
I'm kind of testing it out in my mind on different things.
The way that I tend to approach it is really through the idea that extremes necessarily call each other.
That's the way that I tend to think about it.
And so that's why...
when I see a move towards idiosyncrasy, what I notice is that there's a move towards control that happens simultaneously.
And that move towards control becomes more and more tyrannical as the move towards idiosyncrasy functions.
And so to me, that's the only way to explain certain things.
So for example, like the relationship between self-naming and you being whatever it is that you want to be and and you could just say what you are you're a cat you're a whatever and that you can become whatever you want that and cancel culture at the outset you think how do those things fit together but it's because one necessitates necessitates the other by its very well by its very uh idiosyncratic emphasis right and so That to me is the way that I explained also the relationship between globalist control tendencies.
Like that's why there was even, it was so weird, like it was so weird in COVID to watch the alignments, right?
To watch the rainbow people align with absolute state control over every aspect of your life.
And it was like, how is it, how did this work?
But I realized that in some ways that this was a necessary thing.

**P.Shchelin:**
Sorry, just a quick...

**J.Pageau:**
Let me just say one more thing.
So what happens is that on the one hand, and even in this rainbow culture, you have something like, you should love me just the way I am.
You should not judge me.
You should love me.
But then in it, there's this insane level of judgment that will basically force you to do like a...
you know that that that can that can destroy your career destroy your life destroy all of your elite all of your reputation because

**P.Shchelin:**
it's not love because again again there is a trick i think which is happening uh because it's not about love it's about chosen And it's unfortunately this derivative of American Protestantism.
Because again, I think I was wrong.
That is, only chosen can be loved.
Only pure can be loved.
Only perfect can be loved.
Like chosen who is saved, you know.
Yeah, yeah.
Elect.
Elect.
so what's the name love it's like you should love me no i should be elect i am the elect and it's all competition of different for different statuses of elect so i cannot be elect in capitalist system and i think it's wrong i don't think your quote-unquote electability should be based on your economic success it's a different story but that's why i think they kind of created this but then they so we cannot compete this so we create an alternative way of competition but for the same thing so now we're elect because we are rainbow now we're elect because we are wearing a mask.
And the goal of the state is to effectively give you a passport paper.
You are the elect one.
That's what they're fighting for.

**J.Pageau:**
Oh, yeah, that's an interesting idea.
And so then the social credit system tendency that we were moving towards makes sense.
It's like you basically want God to tell you you're of the chosen people.
But because we don't believe in God, we want the state to do it, to say you're a good boy, you know, like you're the one and now people should love you.

**P.Shchelin:**
And now people, exactly, yours is a good one, and now people should love you.
Yes.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's a really, that's an interesting idea because usually the way that that functions, right, is organic.
There's an organic process by which we discover respect and love and a kind of election, right?
Because if I marry someone, I elect them.
If I, you know, if I hire people, I elect them.
And so there's this kind of organic process.
But, you know, the...
Yeah, the tendency is to want to find a way to be an elect that shortcuts all of that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because it's all tyrannical and bad.
Because they are not arbitrary.
I'm not free in this.
Because I was born into family.
For example, I'm not loved by my family and I was born into it.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, so the, you know, strange, whatever, brave new world.
vision that you see in in some of those cultures where you should you should you should not be allowed to refuse to sleep with someone like you should you see that in in in some of the the rainbow stuff where it's like you know i'm a trans this and it's like it's unex it's unacceptable that you don't want to sleep with me like you should and it's like there's this weird imp implying that almost like the state should force you

**P.Shchelin:**
Because otherwise you're denying me my chosen status.
Exactly.

**J.Pageau:**
You're denying my identity by not...
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's an interesting idea.
I'd have to play that out in my mind.
Also, like, to see what the corollaries are.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So this is interesting also in the idea, you know, you see that in the book of Revelation.
You see these two images, right?
One is the image of the number of the beast, right?
The beast gives you a number, gives you a name, right, for all intents and purposes.
And that makes you part of the system.
And now, without that, you cannot be recognized.
Nobody can recognize you unless you have that name.
But then there's another image in the same book, which is that God places on you a secret name, like a name that is only your name, and that that is your true elect nature, like in the sense that you are made in the image of God.

**P.Shchelin:**
True name, effectively, your true name.

**J.Pageau:**
their true name, right?
and so it's like these two images of where it is that we get our value from

**P.Shchelin:**
correct me if i'm wrong but i think the difference is that like the mark of the beast is visible and the mark of the god is invisible

**J.Pageau:**
yeah it's hidden it's a hidden it says we'll give us we'll put your name on a stone like white stone that only you will know like there's a secret aspect to it for sure

**P.Shchelin:**
but see that's the thing that's where for us everyone is a human i think that's the challenge because this hidden element there is no certainty like you don't know and that's like what the christian culture has been struggling for like millennia we have to admit that people wanted to be saved but they it was but they were anxious about it because you don't know are you saved or you know that if it's the most important question if it is hidden so it's a constant exercise in this humility it's a constant exercise of surrendering yourself and you can humanly understand the desire.
I just want a paper.
I just want somebody to tell me for sure being at God or stay.
I don't just give me my ticket.

**J.Pageau:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
Give me my ticket.
Give me in actually in both ways.
Either I mean or I out but don't torture me with this uncertainty.
I think that's one of the I think like it's something psychological here involves it.
Yeah.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah.
But that's interesting.
I'd never like I would never have put a Calvinist twist on this.
But it is something to think about for sure.
It's something to consider in terms of this idea of a kind of certainty of election in you, right?
Which is, you know, the traditional way of understanding the certainty of election is that the certainty of election is in Christ.
It's not in you.

**P.Shchelin:**
Exactly.
No, exactly.

**J.Pageau:**
But bringing it into the individualism, like linking it to individualism brings that weird kind of state.
Yeah, and then wanting to be chosen by something that makes it public that you are to be loved, let's say.

**P.Shchelin:**
And then effectively you just have competition on the criteria, on which criteria we're giving this paper.
Is it money?
Is it race?
Is it nation?
Is it class?
Is it gender?
It's just a competition on which criteria we're giving the paper.
Then the whole just develops into it.
So what unites all of these different people who kind of hate each other often is precisely the principle, this whole idea of chosenness not through Christ, which I think actually is a great way of saying it, which you mentioned.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's definitely insightful.
My mind is going a mile a minute, so I would definitely have to think about some of the things we're talking about to see how they jive with other things that I've been thinking about.
But it's definitely an interesting...
an interesting way of thinking about the problem that we're dealing with now yeah for sure uh

**P.Shchelin:**
just again so i guess we can talk more about it next time hopefully like so if you don't mind i just wanted to say how it is bring it back to the whole political idea because i think there is this whole element also about this chosenness and surrendering yourself to christ or not in a way is that and here people might argue but You know that in Maximus the Confessor, he speaks that all of the logos were effectively created before time and effectively that all of the identities, you can argue as a similar pattern, are pre-created, like all true identities are pre-created.
another challenge for modern and rationalist enlightenment thinking which goes into all these different patterns we describe is to accept it because we understand identity is something we create it's something we choose and to surrender to something it's something which we should receive and not control that's a big ultimate challenge but it's also the core challenge which also kind of unites all of these different elements together that's that would be my last i guess point and uh

**J.Pageau:**
yeah i think i mean that definitely makes sense and in some ways that is the the one of the aspects of subsidiarity and the idea of how identity is received right it comes from heaven it's hard for modernists to hear language like that but there's a manner in which identity is the precondition for the being to come together towards a purpose right so you could say that the an identity is a purpose calling multiplicity into its unity uh and that and that this like you said is is received and all the sins of the The big sins in the Bible, whether it's the sin of Adam and Eve, whether it's the sin of Satan, even if it's the sin of St.
Peter, is a sin of self-naming, self-identifying, right?
And St.
Max was a confessor.
He identifies that himself as what he called the sins of the right hand, which is this idea that the first sin is always a sin of not receiving from God, right?
Of trying to contain an identity fully in itself and to own it.
or at its level, and that then leads to breakdown.
It's an image of the Tower of Babel.
Maximus obviously thinks in all these things together.
If you try to hold on to something and make it real completely on its own, then it shatters.

**P.Shchelin:**
But just how it works in the political, we just should have started with that.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, go for it.

**P.Shchelin:**
Basically, I was arguing in a simple example idea that we think that we can take any group of people and make them a state just because we recognize this as such, for example, or make it a nation just because we recognize without any, all the different subsidiarity relations that it was very evidently, you know, after the so-called decolonization process, when Western empires were just leaving.
And these are the borders that we created.
So just you take them and live in them without live and understanding that they're not corresponding to anything, but that's exactly the same pattern.
So we just come and make whatever we want.
including like states and it doesn't work they must grow organic and yeah part of organic growth is competition fighting yes it it can get bloody but there is a pattern but back to your point exactly it's massive confessor so like for us it's just hard to accept that it's not us who creates identities on all level being on personal family structural political global which goes on a global level it's exactly as you said the same pattern we can create this name and identity for ourselves not exactly but we yeah great

**J.Pageau:**
no that's exactly that i think that you're i think that that intuition is is right and in some ways you know that is you know and there's a type of humility right which is that When you're born in a family, you don't choose your family.
Your family comes with all the sins and all the virtues of that family.
I think it's the same with our participation in different peoples.
I'm a French-Canadian.
I don't choose that.
I'm born into that reality.
If I try to deny it for some universalist thing, or I try to self-create my identity, then I'm actually...
I'm denying, you know, aspects of what of what I am.
And it's not useful.
It's better to acknowledge the virtues and the sins and to try to cover the sins of my father.
Right.
To cover the nakedness of my father as I move forward.
Yeah.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, yeah, I.
couldn't agree more with what you just said and i guess for the rest of the questions we raised we can talk next time when you have sure

**J.Pageau:**
yeah but i think like the difficulty that we have now is in some ways because we're facing these global solutions like we're noticing the global solutions kind of establish themselves and we're actually seeing them as you know competing or trying to compete with national national interest uh you know the question is what can we do because it can really bring us into a state of despair because we're presented with the vision of an individual in this global citizenship, right?
But I do think that the solution that we can do is recreate subsidiarity at the local level, right?
And that is to be a father, to be in a family, to be a member of a community, whether it's a church, whether it's different aspects.
building of subsidiarity will offer resilience when the Tower of Babel falls?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yes, we can develop this.
So basically, I completely agree with you.
That's exactly the same advice I give when people ask me, okay, so it's all well and good, but what we do?
Well, basically, I have to admit, I'm borrowing this ethos of yours because I agree with it.
I would just add one step, which in my opinion is necessary for it.
exactly on the level of a soul, you need to recreate subsidiarity between you and something higher than you.
Because it is, in my opinion, the foundation for all of the other subsidiarities which you've been describing.
but it's just a nitpicking from my side and other than that effectively you just said it's just i would say it's a paraphrase what we have in the 36 psalm which says fret not they self because of evildoers neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity for they shall soon be cut down like the grass and wither as the green herb trust in the lord and do good so shall thou dwell in the land and verily thou shall be fed so kind of it again we are not the first one who dealing with it i think that's constantly missing this element we are not yes technology makes it seems that we are in a more dangerous situation because let's say the scale is bigger but the pattern is the same and the towers of babel have already fallen multiple times like yeah like it it's not the first time it's happening so like so that's a practical advice actually yeah read history and then you don't feel so lonely so then you don't like

**J.Pageau:**
i think The psalm you quoted is great.
It's like love God and love your neighbor.
That's it.
If you do that, then that's the only solution.
It's the one that Christ gave us.
And that's the solution to the subsidiarity problem.
Because if you do that, then you'll have natural relationships with things around you.

**P.Shchelin:**
To what extent it works.
Maybe in better times it will be a bigger circle of relationship.
Maybe in the worst time when everything starts falling apart, it will be the circle of your city.
or the circle of your neighborhood.
But it's not for us to know the time.
There was recently Ascension.
It's not for you to know the time.
It's not for you to know the times, we are told.
So it's not for us to know the times, but it's for us to do what we can.
But to understand it, I think you do need to, and that's your favorite subject, which I agree with completely, you need to know the stories.
I would argue that without stories, without embodied stories like people you cannot really orient yourself in this maze because yeah we've been talking for it forever and a half and it's just the beginning of this maze like we like our thing is so trapped in these different loopholes which are seem self-evident but we don't understand why self-evident we don't understand what is unifying them so it takes time but other than that you can keep the optimism going.
And the best way is the story.
So I think just in the end, I want to mention that the story can kind of summarize, or even better, what you do is image.
An image can summarize an hour and a half political theology conversation into one image, and you can look upon it and see it in everything.
And that's also a good place to start.

**J.Pageau:**
Yeah, that's great.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, again, then, so...
I'm very grateful for the generosity of your time.
I'm very grateful for your coming for this meeting and I hope many will follow in the future.
Thank you very much, Jonathan.

**J.Pageau:**
Thanks, Pavel.
Yeah, it was great to talk to you.
I really enjoyed it.
