# Babel and Leviathan. Conversation with Richard Rohlin

May 04, 2024 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNi_yQNtj_M) 44:41

I interview Richard Rohlin, scholar of symbolism, philologist and co-host of the Amon Sûl podcast.
We started the conversation about two key symbols of Universal History - the Tower of Babel and the Leviathan.
We explore how they are both rooted in "the" problem of political theory - "unity and multiplicity" and how the solutions they offer created the modern world.
We also talk about Church as the other way of understanding of the Unity and multiplicity problem.

**P.Shchelin:**
Hello dear audience of my channel.
Today I have a special video for you.
I have a wonderful guest.
His name is Richard Crollin.
He is a historian, linguist and one of the best persons I know in terms of the study of symbolism and building the bridge between the symbolic thinking and real life political issues.
I'm very happy to see you on my channel.
Thank you for accepting my invitation.

**R.Rohlin:**
i'm i'm really happy to be here and uh thanks thanks for having me i know it's been a little a little difficult to get this interview uh scheduled and everything uh so thanks for making time

**P.Shchelin:**
ah no problem at all

**R.Rohlin:**
so

**P.Shchelin:**
today what i wanted to talk about is the whole let's say area of the problem of unity and multiplicity which i think is the problem of let's say modern not just modern but any political or communal reality as such it is in the center of all problems hopefully it will be just the beginning of our conversation but we will see how it will go what i think we can both bring to the table is exactly an intersection of two connected but slightly different perspective of political theology and universal history and we can start through exploring like big symbolical if you want archetypes which through which through the lenses of which we can see this whole play basically being played out sorry for tautology so my first question to you would be based on like recently and i recommended there will be links in the description to watch several videos you made with Jonathan Peugeot on the symbolism of the Tower of Babel.
But let's say for people who don't know the symbolism that much, could you start by maybe giving a heads up into why the Tower of Babel is the crucial symbolism of the problem of unity and multiplicity?

**R.Rohlin:**
Sure.
All right.
So I'm going to try to summarize.
Peugeot and I recently recorded about two one-hour videos, so there's a whole lot there.
So I'll just try to kind of briefly summarize some of that a little bit for your audience and then direct them towards that.
So I think that most of us are maybe familiar with the image of the Tower of Babel, whether you've read the narrative that's there in the book of Genesis in the Bible or not.
But I think most people are kind of familiar with the story.
right so the story is that humanity this is after the flood right after the flood of noah has sort of covered the world in chaos and wiped out all life you know except for noah and his family and uh now that the flood waters have receded and mankind is beginning to grow and prosper again uh they come together and they say we want to build a tower they say let us build a tower that reaches up to heaven right And this is really for two reasons.
One is to kind of, you could say a tower is an artificial mountain.
And so it's a way of escaping the waters of the flood, right?
So let's say that chaos destroyed human civilization.
So now they want to build a tower to basically escape from the chaos.
So chaos is symbolized in the scriptures by the floodwaters and by like the rising of the sea.
Okay, so they want to build a tower to escape chaos and so that chaos can't destroy them again.
And so they begin to build this tower.
And the other reason that they want to build this tower is because it's associated with idolatry with the worship of God, but let's say the improper worship of God.
So the thing that they want to do is actually to be able to bring the the thing that they actually want to be able to do is to be able to bring god down and sort of like control god um and so it's the it's the origin of idolatry in the in the scriptures or the the the kind of the first instance of idolatry happening in the scriptures and it's intended to be a um it's intended to be a way of you could say like a sort of manipulative spirituality so uh and in this sense it's transactional the idea is um this and this is how ancient idolatry ancient paganism works is that i give god something and then he's going to do something for me in return so it's this transactional relationship which is not um which is actually not the way that christianity is or at least not the way that it's supposed to be so this is the kind of the symbolism of the Tower of Babel.
And so this gets developed out of the narrative that's there in Genesis.
Other details begin to emerge in the tradition.
And I've spent a lot of time talking about specifically this tradition as it appears in the Book of Jubilees, which is an apocryphal work.
It comes from the Second Temple Jewish period.
So the kind of basically the period of time between the Old and the New Testaments.
And the Book of Jubilees is a very important book in our tradition.
So I should just say for your audience, I'm an Orthodox Christian.
Me too.
I was born...
actually sort of evangelical protestant but then i converted to the orthodox faith when i as an adult so in our tradition uh even though the the book of jubilees is not in our bible it is a very important work in our tradition and we get a lot of a lot of our details around the tower of babel story from this so one of the details that you get in the tower in the book of jubilees and in other literature from around the same period is that the tower of babel isn't just a tower it's a city And this would be like obvious to people in the ancient world.
They would have realized this, but maybe sometimes for modern readers, it's not so obvious.

**P.Shchelin:**
If you look on Bruegel paintings, usually there is a city in front of the tower.

**R.Rohlin:**
That's right.

**P.Shchelin:**
It's one of the most famous imagery.

**R.Rohlin:**
That's right.
Yeah.
I will say I sometimes would see.
i would sometimes see uh uh paintings you know or depictions especially like as an evangelical when i was young uh that just sort of had this tower out in the middle of the field or something so it's not like that it's a city which which again this is sort of thing in the ancient world people would know of course the word babel means babylon so you know to say the tower of babel that's like saying like the tower of los angeles like obviously there's a city there and so the uh the book of jubilees another other ancient texts took this idea of a city and would go to actually a lot of work to try to describe the size of the city, the length of its walls, the shape of its walls as being sort of this perfect square.
And what happens is that Babel emerges, as you could say, the archetypical city of man, right?
This is what Babel represents, the archetypical city of man.
And it's this attempt to unify everything.
and to account for everything now for us as orthodox christians um in our church we actually draw deliberate parallels between the tower of babel and then the feast of pentecost so and this is where the unity and the multiplicity you can really see and understand this imagery so the feast of pentecost which is depicted in acts chapter 2 tells the story of when the apostles uh we're we're celebrating the feast of pentecost they're in jerusalem and they're there in the house uh the house that's sometimes called in our tradition the house of zion this is probably the house of saint john the evangelist and uh and they're they're in his house and they're worshiping together they're celebrating pentecost so pentecost is one of the great feasts that all pious jews were commanded to celebrate And of course, all the first Christians, right, were Jewish.
And so they take this feast, they take this command, and they're still celebrating it.
And actually, the Orthodox Church has kept every single one of the feasts of the Old Testament.
But you could say that in Christianity, the truth, like there's like a hidden significance or a hidden truth of the feast.
that was hidden before christ but now after christ it's been unveiled right and so they're celebrating the feast of pentecost and as they're celebrating their feast of pentecost this wind descends upon them now the detail of the wind is very important uh you will find it in uh you'll find it in the account of the Tower of Babel that you get in Jubilees, where it says that God actually destroys the tower.
So this is a detail.
It's not in Genesis, but it is in our tradition, that God destroys the tower with a wind from heaven that scatters the tower, that basically knocks it over, right?
So this wind descends.
And by the way, according to Jubilees, this happened, the Tower of Babel.
uh uh collapsed right that the the tongues the languages were scattered right so god comes down and he scatters their their tongues he confuses their languages and then they're scattered across the face of the earth and then what jubilee says is they go from that point and they they they create uh their own languages and their own gods and their own towers and their own cities right and everything goes from being one unified human race to now being scattered in all these different places And so what happens at Pentecost is basically, you could say, the healing or the reversing of this curse.
Because the wind descends, the same wind that scattered the Tower of Babel, that scattered the nations, now it descends, and it descends upon the apostles, and each one of the apostles becomes kind of like a unity, or they become like a little tower, right, with a fire, you know, so they have these tongues of fire over their head, right, like a candle is the best way to think about it.
Or lighthouse.
a lighthouse yeah a lighthouse is good uh a candle you know if you're used to like lighting a candle when you pray um but that's actually the thing that people need to understand is that image is actually the same image as the image of the tower because the whole purpose of the tower of babel is to be this place where worship happens right so there's i there's a there's a there's an altar there's a flame at the top right and so it's that same same kind of an image So, and the apostles begin to preach the gospel, but when they do, everyone, and actually not everyone, we'll come to this in a second, but as they preach the gospel, people begin to hear them in their own language.
And it doesn't matter where you're from.
If you're from Persia or you're from, you know, Gaul or you're from Africa, like all these different places that are mentioned in the book of Acts, you can hear what the apostles are preaching.
You could hear it in your own language.
and uh and you it's very easy to see how this is an undoing of the confusion of the tongues that babble right so it's sort of being reversed and but what's really interesting is that it's not reversed in uh by means of everybody just now speaks the same language right so that that you could say the complexity that was introduced at babel stays there so these people still speak different languages but now each of them sort of miraculously are hearing the same gospel translated into their own tongue right and this is a foreshadowing of what the church is the way that the nations are going to come together the way the gentile nations are going to come together and they're going to become the church right which is which is uh so you have a russian church and you have a you know, a Greek church, a Serbian church, a Romanian, right, exactly.
And so it's all the same church, and it's even the same liturgy, right?
And yet, also, there's all this diversity there.
There are all these little differences.
But there are some people who don't actually hear the gospel.
um and for them it sounds like confusion uh they and so they accuse actually they accuse the apostles of drunkenness um and and the thing to understand is that those people um and the reason they're hearing it in this way is because they reject the gospel they reject christ so they're not able to keep the feast in the proper way and the thing that you have to understand is that those people are actually experiencing babel they're actually experiencing the confusion of tongues in real time that the same wind that you could say disperses the holy spirit among the apostles and among the people who are receptive is also scattering those who are not not willing to receive it right and so You have this this action of at the same time of unity, because the church is coming together in a single body.
And then also this this image of scattering, where if you reject if you reject the let's say, like the implications of the unity or if you reject the source of the unity, then you just you simply experience it as that instead of experiencing as diversity, you experience it as scattering.
So that's kind of the basic idea.
And what the tradition will go on to do is to use the image of the Tower of Babel for something like...
So later on in the apocalypse, for instance, the apocalypse of St.
John, St.
John will use, in his vision, he sees Babylon the Great.
Well, Babylon, again, and Babel do the same thing.
So you have it at the beginning of the Bible, and then all the way at the end of the Bible, you have this image that comes back.
And Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots, and this image associated with the mark of the beast, which, as Jonathan has talked about in some of his videos, is the attempt to create a totalizing system that accounts for everyone and everything.
And then the way that Babylon is described as a harlot, as a prostitute, is all the nations of the world coming to her.
And so it's this idea of the central hub.
And in the scriptures and in the tradition, babylon is contrasted with jerusalem right jerusalem is the city of god and all of this culminates at the very end of the scriptures in the end at the end of the book of revelation of the apocalypse when the city of the new jerusalem descends and it descends about halfway between earth and heaven so it's sort of like suspended over the earth and it's a perfect cube right which is goes back to those early descriptions of babylon as being like this perfect square right so uh you could think of the new jerusalem as the as the thing which somehow mediates between earth and heaven the thing that is perfect that's that's uh where everything is accounted for but it's accounted for in a proper way so it's a perfect square but it's got these 12 gates and it's got all these different gems and there's a lot of symbolism packed into all of them

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah and has a garden and and the rivers yeah

**R.Rohlin:**
has a garden and the rivers coming out of it that water the world so it's it's both eden and also the idea of the city all of those things come back together in the new jerusalem

**P.Shchelin:**
so i think uh what is two key elements based on this conversation and i think it's really important to highlight uh that we effectively have two elements first is that the problem of unity and multiplicity is real and you can argue that any anything like starting from atom to like a family to a person to like any group of people being together in a way is always on the brink of a destruction like you know in a way so like that's what for example greeks have called stasis like something which is on a verge of falling apart and it's not something which you know something which comes um extraordinary like as an emergency but it's something which is always here like there is always a chance of something falling apart unless it's united towards something and you can say that it is being called together by this uniting towards something and so that's the first element of the problem and then as you

**R.Rohlin:**
like

**P.Shchelin:**
really greatly pointed out effectively we have a right way of uniting towards something and we have the wrong way of uniting towards something and that's exactly like the two parallels so it's not that the unity and universality are bad per se but they can be bad if they are united towards something like and and I guess here that's where I want to start like a more like political theological explanation

**R.Rohlin:**
yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
or like element because it's exactly towards which you are United or like how United what's the difference becomes in the process of of this unity why some unity results in totality like if you want to call it and like destruction like unification like and you don't want to talk about AI but eventually coming into this field and an alternative way of unity which is still unity but of a different sort and as a parallel one can argue like is that here what I would suggest like I don't know if you thought about and to explore like I don't know how you're familiar with hops like uh but you can see that Hobbes has another powerful image and Hobbes I think is the core theorist of let's say modernity like you can argue that the whole understanding of political community is we're using nowadays by default as Hobbes and it's interesting that he holds his unity effectively a Leviathan and from this perspective Leviathan and the Tower of Babel can also can be seen as effectively the same thing especially if you look more closely into the image of Leviathan on the front of the book which is like this multitude of people being brought together as like little dots and I just don't know if you thought about it because it is a direct implication connection I think with the tower because the way Hobbes writes it's effectively him arguing with Saint Paul like literally arguing example so for example paul and ephesian writes that speaking the truth and love like how to solve the problem of unity within the diversity of gifts amounts of believers so yes everybody is different and we can all fall apart so how can we solve the problem paul writes speaking the truth and love may grow up into him and all things which is the head even christ for whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by which every joint supplies according to the effectual working in the measure of every part makes increase of the body into the edifying of itself in love whereas hopes as a literal parallel writes by artists created the great leviathan called the commonwealth or state which is but an artificial man in which the sovereignty is an artificial soul as giving life and motion to the whole body the magistrate and the offices of duty care and execution artificial joints reward and punishment by which fastened to the seat of the sovereignty every joint and member is moved to perform his duty are the nerves so uh it is exactly the parallel but the whole difference is like the church and if you can say the right way of solving the problem of multiplicity in the political community is effectively through the love of christ like because there is no possible other solution but as i'll say as a bubble or leviathan tries to solve the very same problem is through fear punishment reward you can argue like through propaganda and the fear of death and that i think is very interesting topic like the whole because it is a cornerstone of Leviathan and Hobson-Trump human rights where it's directed so basically only the fear of death is certain and it's the only way political community can effectively be built like through the sphere and in another talk that Jonathan talks a lot about how Leviathan is the symbolism of Leviathan is the symbolism of death like it's connected coming into death conquering death and it is an experiment honestly like and i'm just interesting to hear what you think but you can but one can argue that like uh um effectively the tower of bible is an attempt by people to exactly solve this problem but not through the relying on the grace from the above and not effectively properly let's say attending to what is on the above but exclusive but exclusively building from something from below and using the basic instruments of fear

**R.Rohlin:**
reward

**P.Shchelin:**
punishment let's say unification which in its turn can inevitably result only in cell destruction so and that's what i think is very interesting because if you're looking into further let's say context you can see that the this is the heart of of many modern institutions let's say they're later studies this is the very same symbolism starting later to develop in works of people like emmanuel kant august kant like uh french positivist etc etc also talk about that like we need this first we need this small like we need the multiplicity but this multiplicity must be united by the certain form of totality and in fact it's the same story recreating itself and that's why I think what was the most fascinating to me when I first heard you talk was exactly this element that it is the same thing and in fact the only difference is to which you are like basically to which you are tend like to what is your telos so effectively the only difference is your is your key lesson from which you take the strengths of your tools

**R.Rohlin:**
yeah i mean a really good example of the the sort of the spirit of leviathan or the spirit of babylon or modern age if you want to talk about it that way is is the uh and here i'm just you know it's your channel so forgive me this is too political we don't have to talk about it but but the but the but the sort of the lgbtq plus movement right the reason that they say plus at the end of that now is because uh uh you know it started out as it started out as you know the lg b and then lgbt right and and so on so it keeps growing and then they had to add q and and then uh and then they you know put basically every time a new identity sort of expresses itself it's got to be accounted for as part of the system and so what they'll what the advocates of the system will essentially say is that what they are trying to do is to make a world where everybody is where everything is inclusive and everybody feels welcomed and all this different stuff but really what it really what they're trying to do is to account for everything right to nail everything down to account for every identity so you can go like really

**P.Shchelin:**
but at the same time it's important that every identity is atomistic identity

**R.Rohlin:**
that's exactly it that's exactly yeah yeah that's exactly it because you can you can find these these these uh you know go up and look at you know uh people who have who have definitions of like hundreds of different genders you know and and just you know each one's sort of slightly different and the intent is to is to sort of like uh nail down everything but then the problem the problem is that that uh trying to account for everything uh uh how do i say this like

**P.Shchelin:**
in my opinion in the fact that it is a self-destructive you can even argue it from not a symbolic perspective but from a practical perspective effectively you're doing constant increase in the complexity of the system and every increase in the complexity without it being properly ordered is just creating the basically negative feedback loop you're starting to you're getting overwhelmed with this complexity this complex is the devour you can argue that even you can say that devours you so that's exactly the difference so we admit that there is a complexity that's where we start the multiplicity exists like like it's not a great like it's not a complicated thought and like yeah yeah it's not a new idea but the result but that's kind of the whole debate is all not debate about but that's the whole contrast is about we clearly know from the experience and from symbol is that there is a complexity that destroys and yes there can be an overreaction and we know this cover reaction effectively it's one hand over let's say that to destroy the complexity and to make exactly the unity is through destruction of complexity or alternatively you can try to integrate the complexity into something whole But that comes to another problem, how you do it, and here comes the whole problem of Babel versus Pentecost.
both trying to solve the same real problem which i really wanted i guess to highlight because that's what i think uh often we especially actually we traditionalists tend to overlook a little bit like we want to pretend that the problem is not real no the problem of unity multiplicity is very real but the solutions are different like and that's

**R.Rohlin:**
so it's it's one of those things where uh for in order for a body and this is what we're really talking about we're talking about a body like a city is a body a country is a body yeah also yeah a body is a body a human a family is a body it's really I think easiest to understand this stuff conceptually on kind of a smaller scale so um so I have said I have five children right I have five children so there's a lot of multiplicity right as far as that goes right um and so my wife and I we have these children in the chariot the children are They start out as sort of, you could say, like variations of us, but very quickly they become their own people, like very early, from a very early on, even, you know, one or two years of age, you can already see their own personality starting to emerge.
And as those things emerge, the question is, well, how do we integrate this new personality, this new person?
How do we integrate them into the family?
And if you're an overly strict parent.
right then what you could say is the thing i need to do is actually eradicate that multiplicity i need to beat your personality out of you so that you're just a copy of me right so that is one one way you could go about it and typically speaking if you do this then you'll uh something bad will happen like something bad will happen either your child will will become like brow beaten and too submissive and Or they'll rebel really strongly in some other direction, or maybe both, you know, eventually, right?
So if you try that, that way something bad will happen.
On the other hand, if you just say...
I'm going to let my kids do whatever they want.
And there, I mean, there are some people who, you know, they call it like unparenting or free range parenting or something like this, which is sort of say, I'm going to let the kid do whatever they want to.
I'm going to let them decide everything about themselves, you know, and I'm not going to do anything to confer an identity upon them, which is really what, that's what we're talking about.
That's the purpose of order is to confer identity on things that are lower, right.
But things that below it.
Right.
And so, so, you know, my parents gave me an identity.
And it's not that I didn't have any input or control or power over that, because obviously I made my own decisions at some point.
But my parents conferred an identity upon me, and now I've got to also help confer one on my children.
And if I don't do that at all, and I say, I'm not going to teach you guys anything about God, because I want you to come to religion completely on your own.
That's the same as saying, by the way, I'm not going to teach you anything about math because I want you to come to math on your own.
I'm not going to teach you anything about what it means to be a man, what it means to be a woman.
I'm not going to teach you any of these things that are actually fundamental things about the way that the world is because I want you to come to this stuff on your own.
And if you do that, then your life will be in chaos and their lives will also be in chaos.
yeah go ahead sorry

**P.Shchelin:**
just because it's also even if you would want to do it it's literally impossible because by not by not giving an identity you are effectively giving an identity it's a paradoxical way but yeah but you're also doing it you can't run away from this problem you will do it one way or the other and that's

**R.Rohlin:**
it yeah and so either way you're going to end up with unhappy neurotic children right and so the thing that you have to sort of figure out is what do we uh where does our identity as a family come from and the answer i think seems to be that the or or you could say look what's the t loss of of this body right so the answer is that the t loss has to be something that comes from outside the body itself part of the problem go ahead

**P.Shchelin:**
just i think it's just the key point and that's the key difference of the whole pentacles to the tower of bible because it's so like it's in directional because if you imagine the tower is built from below it's something that we created for ourselves and you can argue that's exactly the project of creating identities if you want to creating simulacrums of identity but basically the whole narrative of constructivism postmodernism which is also very strong now in like political theory for example you can create any nation like within like say 10 years of education and you and then you create a new political community out of the people who never thought that they are but now you give them the whole let's say history stories etc like it's all it's all becomes artificial and from below but And alternatively, Pentecost is the identity coming from above.
And here is another important image which just came to my mind.
Remember how in our churches there is this very strong image of Christ as a Pentecrator, the one who holds all the power.
And you can argue that's exactly the power, the identity even of a state or a community being given from above.
So I think that's exactly, ultimately, the whole difference between these two realities.

**R.Rohlin:**
Yes, though it is a little more complicated than this.
And the reason I say that is because there is something that you have to sort of do that's from the bottom up.
And I'll give the easiest example of this.
The easiest example of this in Christian theology is the mother of God, the Theotokos.
And the way that the church fathers understood what she was.
was as the the pinnacle of human nature or the pinnacle of human accomplishment actually the the you could say like like there's this constant honing so it starts out at the beginning and it's all of humanity is in Adam right and then Adam's humanity is split in half uh by uh the line of Seth and the line of Cain right and then the line of Seth is whittled down to just the line of Noah And then Noah, it's whittled down to Shem and his sons.
And then Shem and his sons are whittled down to Abraham.
And then Abraham is whittled down to just Isaac and not Ishmael.
And Isaac is whittled down to just Jacob, not Esau.
And it keeps going down until it gets to just David's family, right?
And all the way through the scriptures.
And so by the time we reach the first century AD, there's basically just one faithful family left in Israel, right?
And that's...
uh saints yoke and anna that's the theotokos and she is the you could say that the entire time that the edge of of humanity is being honed it's been sharpened to this one point but you can also think of it as a sort of organic rising up of like uh so one of the names for her in the services of the church and this comes from the book of daniel is the uncut mountain the uncut mountain right you know out of which out of which the the stone made without hands comes right you know in other words christ right yeah and and this is this is uh but this is uh this is tied and a lot of times that stone made without hands in daniel's vision you know it's it's it's uh shown as this cube right which is the same shape as that the new jerusalem in the apocalypse and so so there's there's something there about there is something there about let's say something rises up to meet heaven right exactly

**P.Shchelin:**
but that's it so there is a choice of like you like of accepting or rejecting heaven basically in a way so yeah i didn't want like when i was talking so it was like it's just from above it's from above but it's something which must be consciously if you want to say received

**R.Rohlin:**
yes like it

**P.Shchelin:**
must be received and accepted

**R.Rohlin:**
yeah and so the the bottom up reality of babel is this idea of let's bring heaven down to us let's control it let's control god right and this is always the idea behind paganism ultimately especially for the people running the thing right is this idea that um you know i'm gonna sacrifice my child and in return i'm gonna get fertile crops or i'm gonna sacrifice this and in return i'm gonna get that right and there's actually still this transactional relationship uh in the modern world um you know when somebody when somebody chooses let's say not to have children so that they can uh pursue a career or they choose to have an abortion so that they can pursue their career or something like that that is a trade-off that's a transaction that you're making right um that's that's that has a lot actually in common with the uh uh you know let's say like ancient like fertility paganism or something like that and so uh but yeah the difference between that and then the theotokos is that she gives her gives herself freely right and so this is the thing that you have to do if you want to properly host heaven is that you have to actually sacrifice yourself you have to give yourself freely to god and sort of like unconditionally freely open make an open offering of yourself so then the question to kind of go to from there is um where you you could say that you could say that uh the So like the problem, to go back to the LGBTQ movement for a second, just as an example of the sort of like the spirit of Leviathan and how it's playing out.
One of the big issues there is that it doesn't have a TOS outside of itself, right?
It's diversity for its own sake, but it's also, it's not just, it's not really diversity because it's trying to account for everything.
And so it's this sort of like, it's inward focused and there's nothing above it.
Like there's no...

**P.Shchelin:**
There is nothing above it.
It's trying to regenerate the palace within yourself constantly, but through this you can only devour.

**R.Rohlin:**
You can ask the question, what is this for?
People talk about progress.
The word progress itself means to move closer to something.

**P.Shchelin:**
it constantly it also has an element of something uh from worse to better which is also paradoxical because like but then what is the criteria of better

**R.Rohlin:**
right like what is

**P.Shchelin:**
the system by which measure you judge what is better or worse right and within progress it's kind of by the movement itself as long as you move it's good i guess yeah right

**R.Rohlin:**
So this is the thing exactly that I'm trying to say.
Because this movement doesn't have a telos outside of itself, people can't tell you when it will be done.
And this is one of the things that you can look at any political movement and judge whether or not it's real or judge whether or not it's sane.
Let's say it that way.
Judge whether or not it's sane is to say, when can you rest?
When will you be done?
When will you be able to stop?
And if the answer is, we'll never stop.
you know like we're gonna keep we're gonna keep uh revolting right we're gonna keep rebelling we're gonna get well if that's the case then what you have isn't a political movement it is just a cycle of destructive behaviors right so you've got it yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
go ahead so just it's like i don't know if you heard about it but there was a guy named trotsky and his political theory was literally called permanent revolution

**R.Rohlin:**
yes yes yes i'm very familiar yeah yeah yeah yeah but that's that's that's exactly that's exactly it so i i think that i think that this is one of the great i mean certainly one of the great lessons uh in your part of the world you know that that uh the part of the world you're from you know that that uh you know we learned the hard way let's say um over the last century and i it feels like it feels like unfortunately some people didn't learn the lesson and we're gonna have to also learn it the hard way in this country

**P.Shchelin:**
I would argue the lessons are not learned in many ways at all, and that's why I kind of brought gobs, because in my opinion it goes way deeper than, let's say, the start of the 20th century.
It goes basically to the beginning, so the problem is original, the problem isn't the beginning.
So I guess, because I know you have limited time, so I guess just as a summarize, so I guess what once again is clear based on this conversation, there will always be something that holds like there is it's impossible to like for anything like any phenomenon any identity to exist without something which holds but then it comes a whole problem what what is the source of this holding power or like you want to go catacomb even but and we can talk maybe in the second talk like because it's very interesting this was a whole idea of something which holds and the whole idea of power the whole idea of catacomb which like whole the whole idea of time And what is the proper relationship between an identity and that which holds this identity together?
And that's, I think, precisely why the story of the Tawaf Fable is not about the past, it's not about the future, it's not about the present, it's about...
all you know like it's always it's it's universal it's always and the same in the same way in the same way in manner the story of the biophon is always and it didn't even dig into the whole issue of this but you started about this whole time thing that is like and sorry your big reveal that it is one event which was yeah

**R.Rohlin:**
well let me talk about that a little bit to kind of wrap up because i think that that would be uh it's kind of a good transition into talking i mean because because if you want to take take all of the stuff and try to apply it to something in our current day and look at look at our current problems and obviously we have problems the united states there are other problems happening in eastern europe and they're all related to each other and it's all related to this this this huge spirit of leviathan this idea that we've got to control everything we've got to account for everything we've got to make sure that everything is sort of um and and and also that there can't and this is very important that there can't be like an ordering of identities right so you know like like there's not a hierarchy of significance or a hierarchy of identity to the world but everything's got to be accounted for but it's like it's got to be accounted for like it's an addiction

**P.Shchelin:**
it must be it must be simultaneously be split into atoms and united honestly like the whole one wrinkles from tolkien really comes to life yes

**R.Rohlin:**
yes yes yes

**P.Shchelin:**
and that's the only way of unification is through one will to rule them

**R.Rohlin:**
all yeah so so the idea that you get in jubilees um is that the uh uh every one of the great feasts so pentecost pascha and so on every one of the great feasts is actually celebrated in heaven you could say if you want to abstract a little bit say it's a divine reality right but then it breaks into human history at these certain moments in time these uh there's a wonderful uh uh philosopher named Charles Taylor, who wrote a great book called The Secular Age, which I think is a really important book that that if you've got access to it, you definitely like everyone should read this book.
It's a really important book.
And but so he he talks about in the experience of time, the ancient experience of time, what he calls chaotic moments.
You can think of it as like somebody tying a knot in time.
Right.
And these chaotic moments are moments that they don't just happen one time.
but that we actually return to them again and again.
So we're recording this video a couple of weeks before Pascha, right?
So there's going to come a moment where, you know, in two weeks, where we're in the middle of Holy Week or we get to the end of Holy Week, and on Holy Saturday and on Pascha Sunday, we will be actually closer to an event that happened 2,000 years ago than we will be to last week.
right that's the idea of a chirotic moment it's uh it's a you could say it's a like a knot in time or it's a non-linear experience of of of these moments of significance and the thing that i try to argue in in the videos that jonathan and pageo and i did about the tower of babel is that it is these chirotic moments and what and how we participate in them that actually gives shape to our world and helps resolve this question of multiplicity and unity and if you can um uh you you can like put it in very simple terms and say you are what you celebrate so like whatever you celebrate whatever your culture or your people celebrate first of all it is the act of celebrating which makes you a people so you have to find something if you want to be unified you have to find something that can be celebrated that accounts for everything destroying also destroying everything within it right and so you know this is the idea of and i think this is why like for us the feast of feasts is the resurrection why because it's a celebration for all of humanity it doesn't actually matter who you are the the resurrection you know uh the lord's posca affects you because it is a rescuing of human nature from death so it's as a universal celebration as you can possibly get um one of my favorite things that we do uh maybe this will be a good way to end one of my favorite things we do at posca is on um on the the the next day so usually we celebrate like saturday night and then the following day we get together back at the church at my church we do it at about 11 o'clock in the morning uh which is a little rough after you've been up all night drinking vodka but you do what you gotta do you know and uh uh you you uh we come back together for a service called the agape vespers agape means love right so the agape vespers and we we have a very uh brief beautiful fast, happy Vesper service.
But then we also read the gospel and it's the gospel of when Christ appears to the disciples in the upper room and he appears to St.
Thomas.
This is where we're going to pick up next time, actually, because I want to talk about that appearance to St.
Thomas.
St.
Thomas himself, I mean, it's a beautiful look at diversity and unity because his surname or his nickname is Didymus the Twin.
And the question of who he's a twin with, that would be a good place for us to start.
So let me just finish by saying, so this is the gospel that we read.
But in our practice, we don't read it in just one language.
You read it in, at our parish, we read it in nine different languages.
Maybe some other places they might just do three or something like that.
But we read it in nine different languages in our parish.
And the reason for that is because it is a proclamation of the gospel to every language, to every nation.
And it's this beautiful expression of the universality of the resurrection of Christ, but also the fact that you are never going to lose something which has a huge meaning to you.
that's right the church doesn't obliterate your identity now there are certain parts of your identity that need to like let's say die and be resurrected you know if we're going to come into the church but but you don't have to stop being an ally or in my case i'd have to stop being a texan you know because i've come into the church right so so maybe that'll be a good place for us to pick up next time

**P.Shchelin:**
and i think it's a perfect place uh to start next time and i'm happy that there will be next time i think you only scratched the surface of all of these topics but i'm very happy with i guess what we really managed to maybe like to show like that how everything is in this interconnection of the things which on the first glance are not related to each other but then you can see that they are precisely the things which are related to other so thank you very much uh for your time thank you again wishing you a happy happy easter and like

**R.Rohlin:**
happy pascha see you as well

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah see you next time

**R.Rohlin:**
Alright.
