# On Multiplicity and the Spirit of Reform. Conversation with @RichardRohlin

Jun 12, 2024 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lCAO8XzEvao) 01:01:22

I interview Richard Rohlin, scholar of symbolism, philologist and co-host of the Amon Sûl podcast.
It is the second part of which builds upon the topics of unitity and multiplicity we discussed during the previous conversation about the Tower of Babel and the Leviathan.
We continue exploration of how different Stories preserved in Tradition (of Thomas the Twin to name one) explain the inner theology of the pattern of Reform that created the modern world.

**P.Shchelin:**
Hello, dear friends.
I'm excited to welcome you to the second part of a conversation between me and Richard Rowland, which is a direct continuation of the conversation we had a month ago.
We talked about unity and multiplicity.
We talked about Pentecost.
We talked about Tower of Babel.
We talked about the Leviathan.
It was a fascinating conversation, and I invite you all to come and listen to it.
And today, as promised, we are having a part two.
which, once again, I'm excited to have.
Welcome, Richard.

**R.Rohlin:**
It's great to be back, Christos Voskresi.

**P.Shchelin:**
Поистине, Воскреси.
Yeah, so we're recording it after Easter, naturally.
And actually, that's a great transition point, because last time you promised that we will start our second conversation talking about St.
Thomas, the twin, and we celebrated his feast.
And we can go, not this Sunday, but the previous Sunday.
And yeah, all anew, basically.
So not to waste time.
Let's go.

**R.Rohlin:**
Yeah, so St.
Thomas is interesting because he, of all of the missionaries of the early church, you can sort of argue that he's the one that goes the farthest.
Now, there are certain apostles who seem to be, you could say, like apostles to the edge.
They're apostles who go to the edge of the world.
And so St.
Andrew, just as a quick example, is a very, I mean, a very famous example of the St.
Andrew.
There are like medieval illustrations of St.
Andrew, like preaching to the dog headed men, you know, and and so on.
Right.
So.
But St.
Thomas is another one of those sort of apostles to the edge or like the apostle to the extreme edge of the world.
The some of the early missionary.
workings of saint thomas are uh they're recorded in um in a in a uh they're recorded in an ancient christian apocryphal document which uh sometimes called the acts of thomas and it is um sometimes considered problematic there are definitely uh like many of these these really old apocryphal writings there are different redactions out there and some of them are a little gnostic and of course there's also very gnostic redactions of the gospel of thomas right uh one sort of famous example uh but um but but the story itself the core story itself is is has been received in in the tradition And so one of the things we were talking about was St.
Thomas, the twin, right?
He's called Thomas Didymus in the gospels.
So the sort of the question then is like, well, whose twin is he?
Right.
Whose twin is he?
And it's funny because when I was in like evangelical Bible college and things like this, they would sort of speculate, oh, he must have just had a twin.
Right.
He just had a twin.
And maybe that's why he's not at the upper room.
Maybe he's.
He's not there, you know, because he's going to check on his brother or something like that.
But the thing is, all of the apostles, they had family that they could have been checking on, but they're not.
They're gathered in the upper room, we are told, for fear of the Jews, right?
They're afraid, well, Jesus just got crucified.
It's simple to understand.
Jesus was just crucified.
And now they're going to be, they're afraid that they're next, right?
The tradition of the church, and this is a very old, very early tradition in the Orthodox Church and in church history in general.
The tradition of the church is that St.
Thomas was Christ's twin.
He looked so much like Christ that you would sort of mistake them for each other.
And this is why the apostles start to give him the nickname Didymus, the twin, right?
The lookalike.
So this is then...
kind of the sort of the theme of the writings, the apocryphal writings around Thomas and around his travels and his missionary journey.
So as I think most people are aware, St.
Thomas makes it all the way to India, where he founds several early Christian communities.
In fact, Christian communities in India now, Orthodox, Evangelical, Roman, Catholic, all across the spectrum.
very often refer to themselves as St.
Thomas Christians because of this.
So he makes it out to India.
And while he's out there in India, there is sort of famous stories of the things that he does, right?
Famous stories of the things that he does.
And a lot of them hinge on the fact that he looks like Christ, right?
And so in some way, like he is Christ or sort of Christ double.
And again, some people like make a big deal about this and say it's sort of Gnostic where like Thomas is like the earthly Christ and then Christ is the heavenly Christ or something like this.
But I think it's something deeper going on there.
And it has to do with the way that the mission of the church goes to the ends of the earth, which is what Pentecost is about.
So the story goes something like when St.
Thomas is, when he's at the...
You know, it's after Pentecost and the disciples are beginning to kind of go to the different places around the world.
And Christ actually sells Thomas into slavery because God tells Thomas to go to.
I know it's weird.
God tells Thomas to go to India.
Tells him to go to India, right?
And Thomas is like, well, how am I supposed to get there, right?
So Christ says, don't worry about it.
Come down to the docks and we'll find some passage.
So they get down to the docks and Christ actually sells St.
Thomas to a slave trader.
And the slave trader is the one who gets him to India.
So then, you know, Thomas has this whole journey, this whole trip, and he finally gets to India and he gets sold to one of the kings there of one of the tribes in India.
and uh and uh st thomas uh basically becomes like so so there's the kind of uh let's say like an overlap or a um

**P.Shchelin:**
parallel to both joseph kinda and daniel

**R.Rohlin:**
exactly yeah yeah so it's an overlap of uh uh i'm trying to remember the word for this now um uh polyvalence let's say like a polyvalence between uh between Joseph and Christ and Thomas, right?
Because Joseph is also a type of Christ.
He's actually one of the main ones in the Old Testament.
Certainly that's how the church fathers saw it, right?
So in the same way that Joseph is sold into slavery and then rises to this high position of trust, that's what Thomas does as well.
And there are other parallels as well.
So when Thomas gets to India, he rises to this high position of trust.
And this king who's about to go away for a long time tells him, hey, why don't you, why don't you, you know, I'm going to be gone for a long time.
While I'm gone, why don't you build me a palace?
And Thomas says, yeah, no problem.
I'll take care of it.
I'm just going to need money for materials and all these different things.
And so the king goes away on a journey and He writes, you know, a few months later, he writes back to Thomas and he says, hey, how's my new palace coming along?
He says, it's going pretty well, your majesty.
I just need a little more money for building materials.
And he says, okay, well, you can have this money.
And then writes him again, says, how are things going?
He says, oh, it's going fine, but I need money for the roof and I need money for these pillars.
I need money for the throne and like all these different things, right?
So the king keeps authorizing more and more money.
And finally, many years later, he comes back.
He comes back.
And he comes back and finds that there's been no palace built at all.
And he starts asking the other men of the court about this.
And they basically say, no, Thomas has been giving all your money away to the poor.
Well, the king gets really mad.
And by some version of the story has Thomas thrown in prison.
And then in some versions of the story, the king dies that night.
Or sometimes it's like his brother that dies.
But basically, usually it's his brother dies and is sort of resurrected by St.
Thomas.
But like while his, after his brother had died, he's being, you know, taken through the afterlife and being shown, you know, in heaven, like all these great mansions.
And he looks over at one massive, really beautiful.
mansion like this amazing gorgeous palace with the columns and the throne and the roof and like all these things he says man whose place is that and uh you know whoever's guiding him through the afterlife says well that's your brother you know that's your that's for your brother that thomas built that for him right and uh so then he you know kind of wakes up sometimes the king has a dream sometimes his brother dies and is raised and anyway the point is that this causes the king to realize actually where his priorities are, and he converts and he becomes a citizen of the heavenly kingdom.
This is just kind of one example.
The other interesting thing about Thomas is kind of just a recurring trope of the way that he's always late to things.
So famously in the story of the Dormition of the Mother of God, sometimes people call it the Feast of the Assumption, all of the apostles are brought by the Holy Spirit from the four corners of the world.
all the different places that they've been ministering and they're there at present at the at the at the repose of the mother of god except for saint thomas who's still in india and so after her burial you know uh there um as her soul is departing this life and ascending up in heaven uh saint thomas shows up right then and he says where are you going oh holy one you know like You know, I just got here.
Where are you leaving?
And so famously in one story, that's when she bestows her girdle upon him as sort of like a parting gift so that he won't be like without consolation.
So there's a lot of interesting things going on with Thomas.
He's someday when I have some more time to think about it, I would like to kind of look at the missionary journeys and the kind of the symbolism of each of the apostles and the ways that different.
early christian communities tie themselves to one particular apostle obviously antioch and rome both famously very attached to saints peter and paul uh saint andrew also though is one that really gets around obviously for constantinople he's an important saint for the the slavic peoples he's an important saint but also

**P.Shchelin:**
do you know what uh interesting because i just wanted to mention about saint andrew according to russian orthodox tradition especially you know like older tradition obviously it went up the Dnipro river and that's more or less people know that's why he went let's say to the modern Kyiv area and that's where people mostly know the story today but actually according to the old tradition it came even way further north it came as far north as like the Valam monasteries it's currently it's it's very it's it's north let me put it this way it's yeah it's to the north of modern St.
Petersburg so he went up until that point and founded this first let's say broader monastic communities and that's how tradition goes so that's actually the community is way older and that's you mentioned that he is from the scots it's also in a way apostle of the north in a way so the whole kind of the whole northern region

**R.Rohlin:**
places that are kind of on the extreme edge like it's difficult to imagine being more on the edge of the world than somewhere like the lam or scotland right yeah yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah and if and you know even nowadays so this uh andrew cross it's on a it's on a flag of russian navy for example and even now and still kind of keeps on this part of this tradition so it's interesting how this original tradition is still in some state symbols even until now

**R.Rohlin:**
that's right yeah same thing i mean obviously saint andrew's cross is the is the cross of the the kingdom of scotland and it's it's interesting um so what i would like to do one day is to kind of like look at each of the apostles and kind of where they ministered and the way that these early communities kind of identified with them tied themselves but then you have other places that uh where the patronage of one of the apostles becomes really important a long time after i was so so i mean just for instance the the importance of saint mark in venice right obviously st mark uh didn't die in venice he died in alexandria but at some point they brought his relics back to venice and they're like oh st mark he's our patron now along with all this other stuff we looted from alexandria yeah but

**P.Shchelin:**
that's a very questionable story how he ended

**R.Rohlin:**
up yes yes yes yeah but i mean also like i'll i'll just put it this way a lot of a lot of relics ended up in venice suspiciously so but But yeah, I think that, so to kind of tie that back into Pentecost, right, one of the elements of the icon of Pentecost, right, that you'll see is, I wish I had an icon of Pentecost in here.
I've got one somewhere else in the house, but in an icon of Pentecost, you'll very often see this sort of door that's got a black background.
And then there's a figure standing in the door.
And Jonathan Pacheau has done a video about this a really long time ago.
It was like, I think one of his first videos that was really big.
But in very old icons, like sometimes you like to see a dog-headed figure in that door.
But then in modern icons, usually it's sort of depicted as like an old man with a crown.
And then he's holding in his like a sort of a towel or something or a tray sometimes.
And it's got all these scrolls on it, right?
And then around this guy is...
head will be the word cosmos which is his name right so this is the this is a like a anthropomorphic representation of the cosmos and the scrolls that he's holding are the are the words of the apostles in other words the gospel right and this is uh you could say it's like a visual representation of their sound has gone out into all the the earth and they're saying to the ends of the cosmos right which is a line from the psalms which is originally about the stars and planets but which the church applies to the the apostles actually the new testament also applies it to the apostles right which is the church obviously but but uh uh you know for instance that's the if you go to church on one of the feasts of the holy apostles uh that will be the procune on their sound has gone out into all the earth and they're saying to the ends of the cosmos right so anyway that the point of point of all is to say that um uh these saints, saints like St.
Andrew and saints like St.
Thomas in particular, are very closely connected to all that.
And again, I'm just very interested in this idea is Thomas is sort of being the twin of Christ, but then also like, you know, sold into slavery by him, you know, for this missionary work.
And it's, I mean, if you think about that, you can take this sort of the Gnostic associations out of it and say the focus is on.
the way that uh christ who is the king makes himself a slave to the nations right and you can and this is even tied into the way that the christian faith manifests you know to kind of loop back around to talking about um to talking about all this has to do with like nationhood and all these different things the way the christian faith manifests in different times and places so that there can be such a thing as russian orthodoxy or uh or you know even even antiochian

**P.Shchelin:**
orthodoxy syrian orthodoxy

**R.Rohlin:**
an example we really like to use here in the states is uh the uh the way that the orthodox faith was brought to the aleutian islanders in alaska um because they weren't uh they weren't forced into the faith and actually many of them came to the faith despite the fact that so many russians were taking advantage of them right you know like this like the fur traders and and so on like you know people treating them really really poorly and of course that is why the you know that's why saint herman and the other missionaries that's why they came is to look after these people and it was the the testimony of holiness that these men had especially saint herman living among them and, you know, them being able to see that this is a holy person, right?
And so they came into the faith.
They weren't forced into it, but they came into it in this organic way, and in this way that allowed them to preserve their sort of distinct cultural identities while also being Orthodox and also bringing in Russian things, right?
Because that's the way the faith came to them.
And, you know, this is an ongoing conversation that we seem to be constantly having in the Orthodox Church in North America, where...
There are people, especially who are converts, converts from evangelicalism or from some other Western form of Christianity.
And there's sometimes a lot of anxiety.
There's a lot of anxiety about like, OK, well, when are we going to get like a real American orthodoxy?
It always comes down to it always comes down to tangible things like music, which I'm sympathetic to.
Like, I like the idea that, you know, we should know we should eventually sort of figure out like what is.
How do we do Orthodox chant that's also American or something?
And there have been some neat efforts made in this direction, which I like.
There was a really beautiful one that somebody did for Holy Week this year, and it was kind of an Appalachian-style chant, which historically is tied very closely to old Celtic, still Christian, but really old Celtic chant modes.
That's where that comes from.
in in that sense you know there is a connection that goes all the way back to the roots of of the christian faith in the west and and even before the racism and everything else and so uh and so a lot of people are like oh this is really great i think this is so beautiful this is the music of my people etc etc and then of course there were a lot of people who are like oh this is no good this is garbage because it's not it's not the received tradition like you should be using russian music not this stuff or you should be using byzantine tones not this stuff but you know at some point the russian music was also new stuff and controversial and uh and uh there's a process So what I would say to people who are worried about this sort of thing is that you just have to give it some time.
Like if we're going to be orthodox, then we need to also function with an orthodox scope of time where decisions sometimes take, you know, decades or even centuries to be made and problems take a long time to resolve.
And it's better this way.
It's better this way.

**P.Shchelin:**
i just want to build up upon it because i think you actually managed to touch one of the key problem not of just or not problem but pattern of in not in just orthodoxy but also in christianity as such and it's kind of where actually distinguishment between christianity and gnosticism comes in a huge play In the Acts, there is this very famous line when the disciples ask the Lord, like, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?
And he said unto them, it's not for you to know the times or the seasons.
And I think that's actually one of the key, if you want, temptations like humans have after Christ, because it didn't really exist before Christ, because before Christ it was created more or less.
it sucks you go to the hayes or if you're a superhero maybe you kind of go into like Elysium, but it's a very small portion.
But for most, it's just Hades.
After Christ, it's clear that, let's say, eschatology.
Basically, eschatology comes into the life of everyone effectively, willingly or not.
It doesn't matter whether you're Christian or not Christian.
But eschatological thinking is becoming a paradigm of thinking, generally speaking.
But the Christian answer is...
very counterintuitive to anybody it's like yes it is a scatology and even more like in the revelation we know very well how the scatology is going to play out but the exact times and seasons are not for you to know you need to let it kind of develop upon you like through you but not for you to know and that's actually is this anxiety is incredibly hard for within tradition and outside of the tradition we know multiple examples of basically reforms and we don't want to go too deep and we can go into actually it's very interesting topics that we know that everybody knows the reformation is the bigger formation of martin luther etc etc etc but in a way the first great reformation happened within the catholic church with the great popes of the 10th of the 11th century with thomas aquinas being kind of the biggest fruit of this reforms but for like for three centuries uh the great popes were trying to improve like to improve the church around them to reform whereas and it achieved many great results but then again in three centuries people became anxious again okay there have been three centuries of great reforms and yeah there are certain let's say successes but then also like we see people are still not you know in this ideal perfect holy condition which we're expecting them to become after these reforms and the next cycle of anxiety comes into play And anxiety creates two ultimate ways out.
Like, you can argue that there are only two types of principal reactions out of anxiety outside of, let's say, it's either to double down.
And here we see Luther, Reformation.
So go really, really deep.
Or the second hand is humanism, which is also like, let's just focus on the secular time.
Okay, we can't know anything about Revelation.
Like, it's kind of somewhere, some here, but we can't really know.
So if we can't have it here and now, let's just...
Put it aside, put it into bracket and focus on what we can control.
And that's kind of the two options you have when you can't incorporate this weighting.
But again, it's not a passive weighting.
And that's what I think is very cool in your example.
The Christian weighting is the one which is, at least we are called to do, orthodox weighting.
It's a metamorphical.
So it's the weighting which is transforming you.
And that's...
kind of actually counterintuitive.
It was never super intuitive, I would say, as a mainstream thought process, but it's even less counterintuitive for us nowadays when we want, okay, so that's my goal, that's my KPI, that's how I achieve it.
You can't basically transform it into technology.
And that's a big challenge for our time.

**R.Rohlin:**
There's a...
This is actually what I've been thinking about all week.
So I'm really glad that you mentioned reforms because there's something about the action of reform that always results in the sort of like the gathering of power.
Right.
Actually, Babel is a good example of this.
Like you people, you should think about Babel as a reform, like it's a reform movement, because what happens is humanity is scattered.
because of the flood, you know, or humanity is destroyed because of the flood, right?
But in other words, the world experiences chaos, right?
This is chaos.
And the thing that we want to avoid is being subject to chaos.
If you want to go back to Hobbes, right?
This is what Hobbes says is that there's no supreme good, but there is a supreme evil.
And the supreme evil is the fear of violent death, right?
And so, well, if we can't achieve the supreme good, in other words, we can't be saints, then we may as well try to make...
a stable political order, right?
And as defined by a place where everybody is safe, right?
And this is more or less, this is what our society is accepted today.
So Babel, they say, let's reform things or let's reform things and rebuild the world.
Well, how are we going to rebuild the world?
Let's make a tower and a city.
What's the tower going to do?
It's going to protect us.
But it's also going to, it's like you could say building an artificial mountain.
So when the floodwaters rise, in other words, when we experience chaos again, we'll all be safe and we can build a wall that will keep that out.
Go ahead.

**P.Shchelin:**
I just want to add again, there is this very important detail in the tower and sorry for the sound.
Obviously, that's when you need to happen.
But what they started to do before building towers, they actually started making bricks.
And you can argue that it is an effective symbol of any technological process.
Because people think bricks are intuitive things nowadays.
But if you've ever been to the Middle East, learning to make bricks, it's a gigantic technological step forward.
And the fact that they're kind of making more or less what we use nowadays for roads, types of substance.
So it's not just bricks.
So they're collecting this power and they're collecting the power of material change over the world.
It's happening in a parallel.
So it's not just...
yeah

**R.Rohlin:**
and and the there's an interesting detail in the book of jubilees that says that where they get the stuff like the bitumen that they're going to use for the mortar is that they're getting it from the sea so and the sea the sea is you know obviously the story the sea is chaos right so the idea is not just that we're developing technology but it's like we're going to take chaos and we're going to use it to build a wall and a tower and to keep chaos out right and so that's the that's the and and so that's the reforming impulse if you want to talk about western europe in the

**P.Shchelin:**
reform yeah it's taking the energy of stasis and transforming it

**R.Rohlin:**
sorry so there's this long period of actually waves of reforms that begin as you said about the 10th century and then you know culminate obviously in the protestant reformation actually it's not even really correct, I think, to talk about one Protestant Reformation because it was really a gathering of different movements, some of them quite opposed to each other.
And so it begins in the early 10th century.
There's something around the year 910, there's something called the Cluniac Reforms.
I don't know if people are aware of this, but it's really actually quite important to understanding how the papacy emerges like it does over the 10th and the 11th century.
And because basically...
the Cluniac reforms, which is the reforms within the Benedictine monasteries all across Western Europe.
What basically happens is they say, oh, well, look, all of the normal clergy, I'm going to simplify a little bit, but all the normal clergy and the normal bishops and everything, they're just, they're super corrupt.
And what we need is holiness.
So we're going to do an end run around that.
So like, instead of like sort of fixing what's going on with the bishops, where you have situations like where you have bishops and those bishops have, sons maybe illegitimate sons but they're nonetheless they're like passing on the bishopric to their sons or to their nephews or whatever else and so uh basically what happens with the cluniac reforms is that they establish a monastery a network of monasteries across western europe which is not accountable to the local bishop but is instead like this very powerful network that's under basically uh uh under an ordinary like under somebody who's in charge of the whole network of monasteries who's not a local bishop right and this allows them to get around the corrupt local structure so it's building a tower right it allows them to get around the corrupt local structure because the idea is now we're organized and we can be holy but what happens as soon as you organize a big network like this uh you start gathering power to yourself and that usually power in the form of wealth and power in the forms of you know in these other forms as well but that basically and

**P.Shchelin:**
that changes very importantly is the understanding of monastic life which adds up like so it's not about metamorphizing yourself but it's about fulfilling a particular task many monastic orders are becoming like i like to actually use this metaphor like in my some classes that's a kind of you know this space marine so church like for people who like so it's it's it's it's a battle brothers who just you know go into yes so they've kind of in a way becoming this so you for example we have a specific task for example we have a problem of education let's have benefits we have a problem with Protestants, let's set up Jesuits.
But you have a task, and for this task you create effectively an arm of a state institution.
And it's giving you a lot of power and amazing examples of work.

**R.Rohlin:**
This is a sort of a weird aspect of Western Christianity to me.
And to me, it's the thing that the development of all these different orders and confraternities in Western Christianity in the Middle Ages, sort of like...
foreshadows the way that Protestantism will split into all these different denominations, where you're focused on like one particular thing.
And so now you just sort of split off and you become your own church, right?
And there was something like this already happening in the middle ages, starting with these waves of reforms.
But eventually, you know, eventually you have somebody like Francis of Assisi or, you know, people come along and they found the Franciscan order, the Dominican order, the discount Carmelite order, the, you know, all these orders get...
founded and then we say oh no we need we this is not pure enough so we need to split off now and found the carthusians and you know it goes on and on like this um and uh every time that they did this what they what would end up happening so it's a weird thing if you read the history of there's a book actually that uh people might be interested in hold on i've just been i've just been reading it this week so this is why this is on my mind um

**P.Shchelin:**
wonderful

**R.Rohlin:**
it doesn't start quite this early but it's it starts in about the 14th century it's just called reformations it's by a guy named carlos m and erie um e i r e carlos erie and um uh but he he one of the one of the interesting things that keeps happening uh because he's talking about the the sort of the protestant reformation and the like the early sort of proto-protestant reformers but also in tandem he's talking about all the reformations that are happening inside the roman catholic church at the same time and one of the weird things that happens is the way that anybody who's a reformer ends up becoming like a like really draconian authority you know totalitarian kind of dictator within their group once they reform it and he says so so so he'll give an example of yeah there was this this group of monasteries and there was this one person that tried really hard to reform them and as a result this group of and and and and you know i i don't know what the confessional uh you know commitments of the author if any are i don't i don't know anything but but he'll talk about it as like oh it's really bad that the catholic church had all this wealth and power and then and so this group came along and they said we want to get rid of all the wealth and power so they organized and they build the tower and then suddenly and then he says and because of this they gained all this wealth and empower and influence kind of talking like isn't that great but the the problem is that this creates this the cycle of constantly trying to rebuild the tower constantly this sort of like you build you try to to to construct or something that's orderly and then as you uh amass wealth and power to yourself you get scattered Right.
And so eventually the organization breaks down.
The Protestant Reformation itself is a good example of this.
Right.
Where it starts out as a single movement.
We're trying to get away from the Catholic Church.
We're trying to purify things back to what they thought.
And I believe genuinely at some point thought that this was more biblical.
Now, I don't believe it was.
Obviously, I used to be Protestant.
I'm not anymore.
um but no but

**P.Shchelin:**
there are motivations in the beginning like it's pretty clear if you read like and if you read martin luther it's also very important that he was a guy who effectively tried the way so he tried as good as he can to follow let's say the instruction to holiness offered to him and he was genuinely terrified disappointed etc etc so it's not like he just woke up with this wonderful way

**R.Rohlin:**
i mean luther's luther's an interesting example because i like he's he's actually uh this whole babble uh pattern on a micro scale because he tries to like build the tower just in his own life he's like okay i'm going to be a holy person i'm going to rid of all my sin you know by his own account luther was going to confession multiple times a day now you sort of like imagine like your father confessor your parish priest or whatever like if you're going to him you're like three or four times a day for confession eventually he's going to tell you you need medical help You know, like and I there's a you know, I and I I've always kind of suspected, you know, nowadays we'd probably look at Luther and say maybe he he had like bipolar disorder or something like this.
But the point is, like, he really suffered from scrupulosity.
So he tried to build the tower and then his life fell apart.
He experiences the scattering.
And then he says, oh, it's the church's fault.
I've got to reform the church.
And so he starts to build the tower again.
And then with the Protestant Reformation kicks off again, like almost immediately, there's a scattering.
There's a Tower of Babel moment where almost immediately we go from fighting the Pope and fighting the Roman Catholic Church to fighting each other as all these different Reformation leaders sort of split off.
And you've got Luther's doing one thing and Calvin's doing another thing and Zwingli's doing another thing.
And they can't agree on the Eucharist and they can't agree on actually what books should be in the Bible.
They can't agree on the most fundamental things in the Catholic faith.
And then another generation and you have like the Anabaptists coming along and they're.
they're changing the definition of marriage and they're changing all these different things.
And it's this real scattering, this real scattering that sort of happens that is very much, I think, that sort of shape of the Tower of Babel.
And one of the interesting things is that I think sort of comes about, and this wasn't Luther and Calvin's generation, but this comes along sort of later, is this idea, well, I guess we tried to make everybody a saint.
I mean, this is the...
the project of Calvin's Geneva or some of the Calvinist cities, the reform cities in the Netherlands, right?
Where the idea is we're going to force everyone to live in a certain way so that they can become a saint.
So then it's like, instead of reforming a monastery where at least people are here more or less voluntarily, right?
And they've all agreed on a certain rule of life and everything else.
Well, when Calvin started building Geneva, you know, like trying to make it this, like the perfect Christian city.
right you know uh it got to the point where um by one account there were people whose job it was to like check and see how many spoons you owned right like like in other words like how much silverware do you have like back back when silverware was actually silver right so check and see like how many spoons how many forks how many knives to make sure that you weren't like accumulating wealth to yourself that would put you over somebody else in the community right so it gets to be like a little draconian And now those places are the most secular places in the world.

**P.Shchelin:**
And it actually makes total sense.
Sorry, again, for suffering the sound.
But I think it's connected to Gobson, one important element, as I write in the article I sent you.
He had a very particular understanding of what a human is.
And that's actually, I think, kind of connected altogether.
He calls it a person.
And in English, you know, a person is just a normal word.
We use it every day.
but it's actually coming from greek prosopon the mask and we can argue that it's the mask which is the social like and we all wear the mask you can say that you wear the mask when you work for your boss when you are in a way you're talking to me like it's different social roles and actors but where gobs was crucial and that's what i think is the point he kind of narrowed down for the whole of human the whole of an individual to this mask and then it becomes clear if all we are is a mask and that's actually very con contingent with this whole legal way of thinking about life let's say jurisprudential like so like and if we understand for example the confession in a legal way that's also like let's say my mask is confessing let's say i broke the law i need to confess then it naturally is that you want to make it hard.
Like, obviously, like, then you want all the masks to be good, because how else could it be?
Because then if one of your masks, it changes the purity of the whole structure.
Whereas if you consider more, let's say, in which, like, it's definitely Orthodox tradition, Orthodox understanding, but I would argue Christian general tradition, which we are called to, we argue that no mask is enough to describe a person.
There is this mystery of inner life.
And this mystery can, in principle, not be touched by any structure, by any reform, by any external forces.
It can only be transformed through Christ and through within.
But it's always this organic process of waiting, and there is no deadline.
It's not a timetable.
The salvation train doesn't come on a schedule, if you want, effectively as a metaphor.
But then it definitely changes.
almost expectations then you can leave the room for impurity in a social structure in a social system you don't have to ultimately to build a tower because there is no basically you personally won't be late let's say to be saved in a way so you you can leave time for it do you see what i mean i think it actually comes to the core understanding of our whole what we mean to be a person what is it is it just the sum of our social relations or is it something which cannot can never be put even into on a scale except by let's say the heart like the orthodox original called about as the heart nobody knows the depths of the heart what is the heart

**R.Rohlin:**
i mean all of this i was actually thinking this even before you said this so again we're tracking we're on the right path here i think all of this for me really sort of highlights the importance in our tradition of saint gregory palamas and his his his life and his the the writings that he left and the but even his homilies like even his homilies directed to lay people um for people who aren't aware uh saint gregory essentially defended the orthodox faith against humanism Right.
So you've got Barlam, who's who's he is a monk.
He's an Orthodox monk, but he's a very sort of worldly or like very humanistic monk.
He's steeped in Greek philosophy and and kind of secular learning and everything.
And he goes to Mount Athos and here's all these here's all these Orthodox monks.
They're praying the Jesus prayer and they don't have any of the education that Barlam has.
And he basically I mean, he calls them navel gazers.
That's literally that's the epithet that he uses for them and basically says this is a huge waste of time.
What you should be focusing on is education.
And it's a it's a it's basically the statement.
Right.
That I was mentioning a moment ago.
Right.
The kind of the idea of.
I don't want to paint with too broad of a brush, but let's say like just like the worst the worst examples of humanism.
Right.
And and and, you know, to go back to Hobbes as a for instance, right, to say that, well, you can't ever be like totally holy in this life.
So you may as well not try.
Right.
You may as well instead like focus on just like making human life as good as human life can be.
Right.
And so the idea that St.
Gregory is defending against Barlaam, among other things, and again, this is very complicated stuff, a lot of technical reading if you want to get into this, but what he's really defending actually is, first of all, what you just said about the hiddenness of the heart and that that is true both for us, but it's also true for God, right?
And God, you're not going to find God through...
through, you know, philosophical training or human learning.
And it's not to say that a lot of people haven't.
What I mean by this is to say is that, you know, if you if you read a bunch of books and you do a lot of philosophical training and then some and then one day you sort of wake up and you realize, oh, the thing I've been actually looking forward.
for this entire time has been god and to know god and to have a relationship with him right well he's revealed himself to you now he might have used all of these other things but these things didn't reveal god to you god revealed god to you and this is the only way um and so god's heart you god's heart his essence i mean this whole idea his essence is unknowable right but also the essence of each you know but our essence is unknowable you know like the the human heart like who we are and what we are is is unknowable but i know you through the relationship that i have right but also i have to understand that there's always a little bit of a gap there between them the more perfectly we work we we live into that relationship the more perfectly we live into that relationship uh the more the better i i know you but with god he has the capacity let's say to reveal himself to reveal himself.
And, you know, this is through, through his divine energies, but to reveal himself, you know, sort of directly to the human heart in this, in this actually in an unmediated way, because this is the, this is the crux of the argument is that the energies of God are not media.
They're not a mediator.
They are God himself.
They are God himself.
That's what I'm trying to say.
So the question becomes a sort of a question about the knowability of God.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's exactly the solves the problem, which we're talking about the problem of anxiety.
because that's another metaphor basically what saint paul marcus it's like you can know god not as an abstract concept but effectively you can feel like you think you use this as a metaphor of a sun in one day and energy effectively is the warmth of the sun so you can actually stand in this sun and feel it right like but not just centrally field again yeah technical terms how exactly this feeling happens yeah but and we can argue so what why does it matter but that's kind of the crux of the argument of the whole medieval time it was a principle question because for example uh alternatively you have people falling into despair if you read Petrarca of the same time.
He is in despair because whatever I do, I'm not good enough to know God.
And what's the point?
And that's a very real issue.
And nowadays you can say perfection.
Whatever we do, we are never good enough for this perfect image, whatever we put into our head.
So what do we do?
How can we live with this anxiety?
So it's the same problem.
It's the same pattern developing in different areas.

**R.Rohlin:**
Yeah, it matters because, and this is how it ties back to Babel, and this is how it ties back to everything we've talked about last time and this time.
It matters because the question is like, what's the telos of the human being?
Like, what's the thing that you're made for as a human being?
And what St.
Gregory says, and what St.
Paul says, and what the church has always sort of maintained is that the thing you're made for is union with God, right?
To not just know things about God, but to really know God.
right and basically what basically what uh barlam was arguing for is this idea that you can only ever know about god right so pursue philosophical learning pursue education pursue theological learning that's all fine but don't think that you you know because you're sitting on a mountain in a monastery seeing the jesus prayer and you're seeing you know the uncreated light and all those things don't think you have more of experience with god than i do you know that kind of a thing uh but then like the i mean barlam is the one who taught petrarch greek like these these guys are really connected right um uh and and this you know and so there's this kind of this kind of this idea that well once you abandon the idea that the thing your life is for is actually to know God, then all you're really left with, that there's no sumum bonum, all you're really left with is to say, well, how can I just make human life as great as it can possibly be?
And reform is always a really important part of that.
And it's not to say there's not a good way to go about reform.
Actually, one of my favorite examples of...
a reform controversy.
I'm sure you're familiar with the possessor controversy in Russian Orthodox history.
Yeah, so it's basically...
What's that?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, sure.
In Russian, it's called нестяжатели.
Like, нестяжатели.

**R.Rohlin:**
Yeah, like the possessor-non-possessor controversy is usually how it's translated in English.
And basically, it's an argument between the successors of St.
Sergius of Redanche about...
How do you say that word, by the way?
Is it Redanche?
I hear people in English say all kinds of ways.
And Russian is not a language that I know very well.
Although I think I found somebody to teach me finally.

**P.Shchelin:**
Is it by chance Nicholas?

**R.Rohlin:**
No, no, no.
Somebody here in my community here in Texas.
So maybe someday.
no promises guys but maybe someday we do these conversations in russian that would be if you

**P.Shchelin:**
need it if you need any practice just let me know

**R.Rohlin:**
ah that would be great that would be great yeah so anyway so saint sergius is um his six his successors you know there's kind of an argument about well should we build our monasteries in the cities so that we can look after the poor and do all these things but also that means by the way you have to own property right you have to own property and which means you have to have somebody administrate it and then you start building wealth and all the problems that come with that Or do we live off in the woods somewhere and just pray?
And the amazing thing about the Orthodox Church is that we canonized both of these guys.
We canonized them both.
And to me, that's just always just kind of an amazing, something that's very hard for a Western mind to grasp, but something I've really come to appreciate in the Orthodox Church is that the answer is...
is usually both and usually if you find yourself in a kind of a uh either or place and this is this is the the problem with every reformer in uh uh this is the problem with every reformer in western history is is that they're they're usually people who could only see things one way right and they they're because they they're they're fixated like they can only see things in this one particular way so luther says no it's got to be all grace why because i already tried and i failed so if i failed obviously everybody has failed right so it could only be grace it's got to be all grace right so they can only see things in one particular way and that's the that's the building the tower that's when you get scattered

**P.Shchelin:**
it's this very wonderful than you said it i just wanted to add like speaking about reforms because in like russia has its own even in church example example of a pretty bad reform and it happened later in seven

**R.Rohlin:**
years

**P.Shchelin:**
and i would argue that's the wound which is kind of if you want to understand russian history you need to understand the 17th century like and that's just it's a topic for another conversation kind of how to do things the wrong way uh how to do the things the right way though like in both of these guys both the possessors and non-possessors, because possessors were also building up on part of a tradition which starts with Moscow metropolites, for example, the hollow metropolit of Alexei of Moscow, who is, in fact, you can argue, the creator of Moscow state, in a way, not maybe from a legal perspective, but he played a huge role.
But I would argue that the key difference for us to notice here, and it's very broad speaking, is the different principle.
How would I distinguish between good reform and bad reform?
Good reform seeks only to effectively become a rock.
Doesn't matter whether you're in a forest or doesn't matter whether you're in a city.
And then around this reform, kind of certain radiating light is happening or some movement is starting to happen.
And then the metamorphic transformation of a place around this rock is happening.
Whereas bad reform always tries to go to the place, to collect the place and to build the tower.
And that's exactly the difference.
The problem is the second one path is much, much clearer.
You can build expectations.
You can have program.
It's very, very clear.
The first reform is way less tangible.
It's way less predictable.
It's way less.
Yeah, you can't put it into timetables.
That's what makes it much, much harder.
But the change is that within its path, you keep the core issue where the core phenomenon, which I think the whole orthodoxy is based on the problem.
of a subject it puts a subject as an individual not separated but as a precisely agent you can even argue into the center and you leave it its freedom to turn to be transformed to be like you don't even have to tolerate that's another cool element which often likes another going into the wrong direction is what's okay so if this is all happens let's just not be clear about anything okay if any attempt to build something creates in a tower so let's not just build anything or let not be clear in anything but it's also a wrong way you can be clear and like let's say all the monks were very clear like all fathers were very clear maximus the confessor was so clear it was he had a very difficult life because of because of his clarity but he didn't try let's say to go and start a revolution that's that's what that's the difference i mean so you can be as clear in your agency experience you know being an acting subject but you're almost realistic about the extent you can invoke change in ourselves you leave it to them to invoke change

**R.Rohlin:**
in ourselves and and very importantly when this goes well it goes well because there's a holy person at its center right who's who's holding things together who's who's become there's a phrase used about saint seraphim of sarov which i just really love that he was totally transparent to jesus christ right so if you have a holy person at center even if i mean and holy does not mean the same thing as polite There are famously some saints who were maybe not people you'd want to have over for dinner, but to have a holy person, a person who's totally transparent to Jesus Christ in the time and place where God has put them, in the way that they're supposed to be.
Then when a reform happens around them, it carries the authority, but it's the authority of Christ.
It's the authority of holiness, and it's not the authority of...
a top-down structure that somebody like rigidly you know um i mean uh to think of like another monastic reformer right saint basil the great who literally if you're orthodox wrote the book on monasticism i mean literally the book right um saint basil the great and and uh we've never had we don't have another kind of monasticism in the orthodox church like we don't have orders we don't have you know any of those things just sort of like was to sort of follow the pattern of life, the rule of life that St.
Basil and obviously others, you know, the Egyptian desert, that inheritance as well.
But the things that he wrote, right, the legacy that he left continues to be with us today because of this sort of the authority of his holy life and the saint that he was, the holy person that he was.
And obviously somebody that God, you know, had.
uh an extraordinary you know number of natural talents right a gift for all these different things it uses those things for the kingdom of god but he's still uh at the end of the day the most important thing about him is that he was a saint right he was a saint and um and uh you know and then on you know sometimes also you know they kill you first right you know or they exile you first you know another great reformer saint john chrysostom you know uh was exiled died in exile you know, before people started, you know, really listening to him and taking him seriously sometimes.
And so anyway, and there are many other such cases.
But I think this is the this is the other thing is that something that really seems to me, I don't want to be uncharitable to people, especially the dead, but something that really seems to me to characterize many of the reformers, just as I'm kind of reading back through, you know, this this book I'm reading right now is really the first time.
I used to study and teach about the Reformation all the time as an evangelical.
This is really the first time I'm revisiting it after many years of being Orthodox.
The thing that seems to really characterize these men as opposed to the saints right is a really just a lack of humility right um a lack of a willingness to sort of submit themselves to a higher authority right especially you know when luther goes and he starts deciding which books are in the bible and aren't or starts deciding like which parts of tradition do i keep or don't right he just sort of says well i'm the one that decides right and um

**P.Shchelin:**
And she's an effect, like, a temptation we all have, because that's, like, we really, like, I like this part of tradition, I like this part of scripture, this one I don't really like, so let's, the goal is, and it's hard.
it's a very difficult labor we need to admit like because for every let's say citation from a bible you have a different like opposite citation from a bible that's it creates an enormous freedom of you to let's say pick up whatever you want and you can build very different interpretations which can technically be reliable upon the same scripture and but the job is to integrate everything to accept it as a whole like wholesomely and that's a hard job to do and like so i just again so you said you wanted to be charitable to these people so i think yeah every time we look in the mirror we can see the same in us

**R.Rohlin:**
i'm not saying that i'm a humble person i mean this is part of like i'm i'm you know uh you know so for i mean people who don't know i was a i was a protestant minister before we came to the orthodox church and one of the things that you know when we left And everybody asked us, so are you going to start your own church?
Like, this is what you do in the world that I came from.
If you're not happy with things at your current church, you're supposed to leave and start a new one.
Right.
And this is just what you do.
And so everybody assumed they asked us, oh, well, let us know when you start your new church and things like this.
I was like, no, I'm never starting any churches ever again.
Like, I'm just, you know, I've got to go somewhere that's been there that's older than me.
Right.
I, you know.
I know too much about myself to want to be a part of any church that I start.
That's the thing.
We have to have humility.
We have to be patient.
I think it's also really important to just be able to see yourself with some distance and perspective.
The thing that ties together humanism and all the big reform movements of the 15th and 16th centuries and all that stuff, is is a uh is a is a shortening of perspective right where people are you know i've got i've got the answer now boy wait till you guys hear like i've got the solution for this problem and you know there's something like especially as americans there's something daring about that that appeals to

**P.Shchelin:**
us Because you're the new world and you're above history, ultimately.
History doesn't matter.
It's for these European freaks.
We are beyond the laws of history.

**R.Rohlin:**
And this is why Americans don't understand why people in Europe can't get their crap together.
It's like, come on, guys.
We've already solved all of the world's problems.
Look how great we have it.
you know why can't you guys just get on board with the program

**P.Shchelin:**
but the same pattern if you notice like you say about this whole uh leave it start your own church the same if you notice the pattern of state creation exactly the same pattern yeah i don't like the state okay let's move to the free land and build my own state like it is it is i agree like for american If you can imagine, it is an effect now in American tradition or American pattern.
It has this huge element of here and now and then.
But you're absolutely right.
I just wanted to notice where the trick happens.
You can argue, okay, it's all religious mumble-jumble.
So what are you religious people talking about?
But after the goat, let's say, secularism, for many people, was put behind the equation, the very same pattern is now playing with the state.
We expect now just not the church.
to create the heaven on earth but the state to create on heaven on earth and ideally within the next five years like ideally with these guys who win the election we want him to create literally heaven on earth within the next four years if he doesn't he's not good enough maybe four years is too much ideally immediately the next night and

**R.Rohlin:**
and it's one of the things that i mean this is why i kind of got really tired with american politics i grew up in a very like politically active family worked on different campaigns and things like that when i was young And, and, but just like I, at some point I realized like the cycle is impossible.
There is no way that you can affect meaningful change in a country of 300 million people, 300 million people.
Like the Romans couldn't do it.
And they had like a 10th of our population.
Like there's no way that you can, you can affect meaningful change in a country of 300 million people in four, in a four year cycle.
Like that's, that's complete nonsense.
You couldn't do it in four generations.
uh and and but

**P.Shchelin:**
you cannot not expect but the whole pattern of expectation is already so deeply ingrained that we don't realize where it's coming from but it kind of almost rules over us that's i think one of the most fascinating pattern i just wanted them to finish like as an opposite like do you know like uh nikolai berdyaev as a philosopher uh he's a really good russian like strongly russian philosopher of the 20th century and has a quote which i really love uh which kind of distinguishes in my opinion the gnostic approach to the state and powers with like more skeptical and realistic which here he says that the purpose of the statement is not to create a heaven on earth but just let it not to dissolve in hell immediately like and i think it is just this changing of an optic and changing of expectations also very to me characteristics that people talk about freedom all the time and again it's topic hopefully we'll have after you will have like back in august or in september because i would want to continue it that uh we're so rooting for freedom, but at the same time we expect something external to give us this freedom and to create it.
on our behalf which is also kind of almost a paradox like because if you realize that much into freedom and i agree with the christian spiral very much into freedom just it's the freedom to transform yourself and this freedom is specifically not from the state like no state no president no like can give you this particular freedom and that is the freedom which you actually seek so it is very paradoxical and like as you i know in jonathan's circle you call it the clown world and i think it's a very accurate description how all of the ideas are intertwined to become to be all almost a mockery of what they used to be, but still repeating the same pattern, which is also very fascinating.
Oh, okay.
So yeah, I guess we're wrapping up.
So again, thank you for amazing conversation.
Again, I'm very grateful for your time.
I hope we both have more in the future.
I definitely do.

**R.Rohlin:**
I've got a bunch of travel coming up, but when I get back, I would love to talk some more.
and uh your audience thanks to your audience you guys don't know how hard it has been to nail me down for conversation pavel's been very very patient so thanks to him and thanks to you all uh you're very kind to have me on thank you very much

**P.Shchelin:**
thank you okay guys and yeah subscribe to no actually richard doesn't have a channel so don't subscribe to the channel

**R.Rohlin:**
yeah yeah don't i i actually so i i have a youtube channel that i don't post anything on i really studiously try to avoid having my own channel because there's just too much I've got too many other things to do and I feel like if I had to if i had to do what you do or like what jonathan does like jonathan has like you know three videos a week or something i would just lose my mind like uh so i'm i'm very happy just to have

**P.Shchelin:**
i try to limit to one a week like that's three years history is too much but you i know you're working on several really cool projects so like once you put them into like process i will also post links to them later and we

**R.Rohlin:**
can talk about those as well i mean everything that i'm doing right now is pretty much going to be coming out through symbolic world press i still have a couple of projects that i'm doing with ancient faith but most of my most of my most of the projects that i'll be doing in the future will be through symbolic world press so people can go watch there for all that and um and then and come and find me in places like this so

**P.Shchelin:**
okay then science again and christos was crazy
