# Metacrisis. Interview with Jordan Hall @JordanGreenhall

Jan 20, 2025 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnkQ7QIITHk) 01:20:22

What age are we living in?
Nothing less than the time of the crisis of everything!
At least, that’s the idea eloquently presented by today’s guest, Jordan Hall, with wisdom and insight.
We discussed what makes and breaks a civilization, what a city truly is, why it may be dying—potentially forever—and why there can be no community without communion.

Enjoy!

**P.Shchelin:**
well hello dear audience of my channel today i have a privilege of presenting you a very special guest guest his name is jordan hall and about all of the guests who were at my channel he might be the one the most difficult to be put in the box that's why i would rather ask you jordan to present yourself to to my audience who don't who doesn't know you yet but i'm absolutely confident will be excited to learn about

**J.Hall:**
great um maybe three three aspects so a big portion of my life in the earlier period of my life in particular was as a technology entrepreneur in the classic silicon valley mold so i built a series of tech companies in the beginning of the internet age um took them public and retired from that in 2007 when i was 36 years old, I guess.
I have continued to participate in that world, but more as an investor or a board member or as an advisor.
But I have some cycles where I'll pulse into it meaningfully and then pulse away.
Then the second chunk, which was maybe 2009 to 2022, was a world of being a highly undisciplined largely self-taught polymath with an orientation towards the big questions, in fact, that we'll talk about today.
Things like the metacrisis, the nature of civilization, the relationship between technology and culture and things like that, where I met a large number of really interesting people and learned a lot of interesting things.
And then the third aspect, which is the most recent, is that I...
I was baptized and become a, I would hope to say, at least deeply committed and meaningfully disciplined, though not well disciplined, Christian in October of, not this most recent October, but the year before that.
So quite brief.
And this has been a significant piece, as you might imagine, largely consuming piece of my life for that period of time.

**P.Shchelin:**
Could not have done it better for sure.
I guess, yeah, let's just jump into this big topics you already brought it up.
I personally find your idea of metacrisis maybe being one of the most eloquent ways of describing just the current state of not just the Western civilization, but I would say the capital C civilization.
And could you help me?
my audience understand them better.
So what is metacrisis?
How it's different from all of the other things we've experienced before?
And maybe why now?

**J.Hall:**
Okay, so I'll start, I'll kind of walk up slowly.
The first thing is just maybe just to notice the idea of what is a crisis.
And this is from the Greek sense of something that cannot continue as what it is.
So there is some, usually a process or a state of affairs.
where there's something about the nature of that state of affairs and the nature of the context of what's happening, where a qualitative change is going to occur.
Pregnancy is a crisis.
There's a period where birth will happen.
And that is a transition where the woman is no longer carrying the baby inside.
She is now nursing the baby outside.
So crisis.
And then what we've noticed in the world now is that there are crises happening all over the place.
And some have come to call this the poly crisis or the multiplicity of crises.
And you can look sort of under any rock you'd like to.
There's crises in finance and economics.
There's crises in birth rates.
There's meaning crises and psychological crises.
There's political crises.
There's ecological crises.
There's all sorts, right, all over the place.
And some of these are, in fact, overblown, but many of them are underreported.
And they're all happening and in some sense are continuing to proceed.
Now, the next move you can make is noticing that these crises are almost never independent.
So, for example, we witnessed that the real estate crisis in the United States in 2007.
spilled over into a series of financial crises around the world, but those also spilled over into political crises or spilled over into even coordination crises that caused the COVID viral crisis to become worse because the political crisis that had preceded it reduced our ability to respond to our environment.
So you now have one level up.
And then one level above that is where we begin to talk about the metacrisis, which is to say, are there deep things?
things that are closer to the root that are themselves the profound foundations that are shaking, right?
So to use the visual metaphor, if we're all sort of standing on a platform and we notice that everything on the platform is shaking, we might say, hey, everything on the platform is shaking.
All of these things are under crisis.
Or we might wonder, wait a minute, are we standing on a platform that's on a pillar and the pillar is what's shaking?
In which case we need to be looking down.
And that was the work that I and a number of people underwent from about, again, 2010 to 2017.
And the answer, as it turns out, was something like, yes, there's a relatively compact set, not one single point, but a relatively compact set of deep events that are occurring now, many of which are actually predictable.
Like you could say, given a proper theory or set of theories about the nature of, say, civilization, what might we expect to occur?
And that these are producing the polycrisis events that we're seeing.
And one of the consequences of that, as you might imagine, is that if you try to address the set of problems at the polycrisis level, at best you're playing whack-a-mole.
And in point of fact, you're usually making things worse because a solution that would be affecting a subset generally produces spillover effects into areas that you're not paying attention to.
So if you want to grasp this at all, you have to find some way of grasping it at the most foundational level.
So metacrisis.
How's that?

**P.Shchelin:**
That sounds great.
And it brings me one question and one comment.
I will start with a short comment concerning the idea of crisis.
The idea of crisis is something which cannot continue.
But also, I think there is an important element of revelation in any crisis.
as a process always reveals something and in that sense i just think it kind of strengthens your arguments that we are in a process when many things which we took for granted are not for granted anymore it reveals maybe that we are not what we think we are or like we don't function based on the principles we say we are functioning and this kind of constructive revelatory element of pain or suffering or destruction which is usually associated with crisis i also think is happening right here right now in a way it reminds of this uh deuteronomy like when it says that crisis effectively you can say that crisis is a moment of choice it's like if you remember that there is a verse uh i have said before you life and death blessing and cursing they are for choose life that both of you and your descendants may leave and you can say that every crisis on a different levels present the same choice you can choose life you can choose this and that's why i think it's important exactly talk about it right now when we live in a moment where i still witness for the last let's say three years more focusing closely exactly this welcome all game i think it's a very beautiful metaphor so attempts to trying to put a new vine into the old um into the old sack so you can use it fireball but my question would be very straightforward so what is the pillar you mentioned that uh like everything is shaking platform is shaking and maybe it's the pillar which is shaking so what you define as a pillar so what do you what do you think is shaking

**J.Hall:**
so

**P.Shchelin:**
there's what was revealed to you so sorry yes

**J.Hall:**
yes i love this yeah what is revealed um and by the way i agree i think all the points you added there are very good so yes um let me see Okay, so there's three things that are at least somewhat independent.
One is that, as it turns out, civilizations have cycles.
And there's lots of people who've written about them in different ways, but the bottom line is civilizations have cycles.
And our civilization, I'm going to put that in quotes for the moment because we'll need to dig into what I'm pointing to there.
But our civilization is nearing the end of its natural arc.
So it is sort of past senescence.
I'm sorry, past maturity and is in senescence.
Or in fact, I would argue is actually undead.
Second, and not directly connected, but deeply related, is that oftentimes civilizations produce changes in the world, which changes.
are beyond the capacity of that kind of civilization to address okay um and so for for as a simple example i mean there's many many examples but as a simple example we might say the the state of the world world's capacity to perceive and activate peace in 1945 was not equal to the novel capacity to destroy the world in the context of nuclear war And so that civilization, which was sort of the holdover of the Victorian British Empire, had to innovate an entirely new capacity to respond to this new possibility.
There was no such possibility prior to then.
So civilizations sort of went their way without having to deal with it.
This new possibility was something that could not have been addressed at that point.
And so the category of the international order or the global order had to be produced in some fashion, which we saw.
to be able to address it at all.
And by the way, sort of nip and tuck, right?
It wasn't obvious that it was going to make it through.
It's still not obvious.
And this happens all over the place.
Some classic examples are, for example, just population.
If a civilization is very successful, the population grows, but the population's growth produces a wide variety of different consequences and very complex consequences, which at some point will outstrip the civilization's ability to continue to maintain itself.
It's cybernetic.
Autopoetic feedback loops.
The third, which is, and now we're going to start getting into the things that are unique in our current environment.
The third is this weird thing about the recursive self-building element of technology.
The famous curve, the exponential curve, which in the West we call Kurzweil.
I know there's a Russian who did it first and better.
So I can't remember his name right now, but I think his stuff is better.
There does seem to be something like that, that there's something about, and I think the reason is actually pretty straightforward, which is it's very, very difficult to innovate some new idea.
It's difficult to invent calculus.
It's difficult to invent arithmetic.
It's difficult to invent the laser.
But once it's been invented, it's relatively easy to learn how to do it again.
So it moves from the state of hard innovation into a new baseline.
Once it's a new baseline, new capabilities can get built on top of that.
And this creates a laddering effect, which produces an exponential growth.
And so while it is the case that new technologies are a part of the second category, the fact that we are now caught in what seems quite clearly to be an accelerating rate of change is novel.
And that that acceleration is happening inside the adaptive frame that humans are able to deal with.
Let me think.
Yeah, let me just give you a bit of a frame here, just as an example of something that's useful.
So I'm going to be dropping in some of the civilization theory that we produced over the sort of 15 year timeframe.
If you're living in a world where the world that you live in, I mean, this largely the physical and technical world that you live in is effectively equivalent to the one that your great great grandfather lived in.
Then a number of things follow.
The first is.
you won't typically have any sense or any idea of progress.
You'll typically live in a world that has a basic circular metaphysics.
Seasons change, days cycle, people are born and die, but in some sense that death is going to be reconnected to a rebirth several generations.
That's something like that.
And there'll be no need and in point of fact, no capacity to imagine your culture changing.
Your culture is well suited to the world that you're in for a long enough period of time that the only thing that matters is in fact that you're able to maintain it and that you're able to prevent it from changing.
That's the key.
But as if something happens where there is a rate of change that begins to bring it such that within that two or three generation span, your world is different enough from your great grandfather's world that it's noticeable.
and there has had to have been some changes to the nature of how human beings view their world, view their role in their world, and respond to the world that they live in, in order to simply respond to the real changes that have occurred, then you're in a different kind of world.
First of all, there will be something like an arrow to time, something like that.
First, it'll maybe look like long circles, but at some point it'll begin to flatten.
There's some sense of, hold on, we're going in a direction that's not quite clear what's happening.
And you will begin to have, culture will begin to have more going on at the software level, let's say, meaning that it will be more programmable.
It will be more of a sense of methodologies, like the birth of law, like the Hammurabi's code, having to actually have a sense that we are going to formally articulate the rules, which implies, by the way, that we can also edit or modify those rules.
Whereas prior to that, why would you formally articulate it?
They're self-evident and woven into the fabric of reality so deeply that...
what would you even mean?
That'd be like trying to formally articulate that when you drop a ball, it falls.
That's a silly thing to do.

**P.Shchelin:**
And just to point out, you have a conflict immediately between these two set of laws, the laws which are self-evident and the laws which are written.
Already known to Greeks, if you read Antigone, the famous tragedy of Antigone, like exactly two set of laws.
There are laws which are given by gods and there are laws which are given by this king.
and which law do i choose like very classical problem emerges immediately once you have this disruption and you can even say alienation from like certain self-evident plus aura and now we are dealing with on a completely different scale but go on sorry just

**J.Hall:**
no this is perfect and so as you move into place with the magnitude of change and the the rate of change starts to pull in such that your life is meaningfully different than your father's life So this happened in the industrial transition, in particular in the 20th century, where your life is very different from your father's life, who actually was very different from his father's life.
So we're now actually getting intergenerational, what they call the generation gap.
Whole chunks of culture are now subject to A, a necessary, and B, an inevitable transformation.
But we have no methodology to actually hold that within any construct where that transformation is going to be.
how do you say, less than random, like orderly.
We're doing our best, but who knows?
Who knows if it's going to work?
You throw the birth control pill into the middle of an entire species that has been grounded on the fundamental iron laws of reproduction since the beginning of the species, and things are going to go weird, just weird.
At best weird, right?
Hard to predict.

**P.Shchelin:**
Social networks.
effect kind of similar comes to mind like

**J.Hall:**
yep absolutely or just this is called the digital as a big big stone in the pond and then of course as we move into the digital one of the things we see is now the rate of change is fast enough and big enough that even inside a single human being's developmental life like the world i live in now is quite meaningfully different from the world that i grew up in in ways that are palpable and so what this does is this creates has impacts on psychology the kind of mind that can form and adapt and respond to the world that it's in actually has to be a different kind of mind.
You have to be a mind, that middle period where cultures would maybe say two or three generations and would drift.
This is a paradigmatic world.
This is the world where we can build large-scale cultural models that sort of look like pseudo-reality by the third generation.
But by the fourth or fifth generation, they're beginning to break.
We have to have some process of modifying and transitioning, which of course means things like giant, educational institutions which can codify professionalize and regularly download paradigms on minds and convert human beings into things that can run paradigms effectively and become part of a paradigmatic machine but as you move into the 21st century the rate and magnitude changes too fast for that entire architecture and so we have to move into some novel moment so that's one big gigantic chunk but that's okay that's a novel moment we're actually in a point that is completely different qualitatively in the nature of what kind of human mind is necessary and capable of responding to the world that we're actually living in and living in more and more and what kind of cultural fabric is able to respond and and connect with that mind that's an entirely new problem that we're

**P.Shchelin:**
in right now well it is fascinating and i don't even know where to start truth be told reacting one thing which definitely comes to mind is the whole technology element which you mentioned and uh i think what we have to i think what is question nowadays and i think it's a little bit what you just talked around is like we cannot no longer go on with the idea of neutrality of the progress or neutrality of technology because that was exactly the technological optimism of the effectively enlightenment effectively enlightenment that technology is the good in itself progress is good in itself and any direction towards forward is good in itself nothing problematic let's say can really come out of it or if it's a over this problematic it's just due to the backwards mentality or like you know usually it was against church but in the 18th century but general idea was just like you know people with backwards

**J.Hall:**
thinking

**P.Shchelin:**
nowadays basically due to the acceleration and speed it's clear that without direction it's just we are entering into the overload and i think overload is a very powerful metaphor on many different levels starting from an individual life who's too much change it doesn't make sense and we see this gigantic decline into effectively medical medicalization of human existence like i can deal with the amount of changing chaos around me there is no

**J.Hall:**
order

**P.Shchelin:**
i can't control this chaos so i will effectively numb my feelings numb my perceptions numb my reason and it's interesting that in fact it was kind of predicted by Huxley 50 years ago so you can effectively see that the trend was already there and I think that's something very future you have to deal with but then also I didn't plan to talk about it but I think when you brought this difference between cyclical and effectively linear it really parallels with the Greeks greek understanding of time and they have cyclos and they have chronos so cyclical time and chronological time but it wasn't just but it wasn't there was an important third element kairos erotic moment if you i know you know what i mean but like for the audience so like effectively to understand simply kairos it's the perspective of eternity like or like eternity comes into this linear fashion so it's not change for the sake of change.
It's effectively a popular song of the 90s, look at your life from the heaven's eyes.
And that's what I think can be one unifying element, which on the one hand is new to our current state of civilization, but only because it was kind of lost.
Because we are living in a very weird time, which we thought we...
can uh and i do speak with because i think it's even though it originated in the west it kind of became a global phenomenon like you you can say that west invented it but that this invention was accepted globally and that's why i and that's where i think this crisis reveals in not the need but absolute necessity of rediscovering like rediscovering the perspective of eternal to deal with the changes of chronological because otherwise it's impossible to keep anything around you so that's yeah

**J.Hall:**
let's hold that get back to that because I think that's going to be a critical like scenic one on but I want to load one more thing on before we go there so because you made a point and I think it's I think useful maybe even necessary to hammer that point home which is that the we is everybody And this goes actually to something that I haven't mentioned yet, which is that civilizations, as I said, civilizations have cycles or dynamics.
But there's a really interesting discovery that came out of the study of technology, technology curves in the 70s and largely in the 90s and then recently.
And it looks like this.
So if I look at Moore's Law.
You know more as well, yeah?
Computation?

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
I know, but just in case, repeat, please.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, I'll say it.
So one of the guys who was fundamental in the innovation of the general purpose computer, Intel, one of the founders of Intel, noticed that computation seemed to be doubling every two years or so, just to make the math easy.
And by the way, that has largely held.
So this is a long time for something which is exponential, a doubling period, the same period to hold.
But here's an important insight that most people don't pay attention to.
And that is the underlying physical mechanism whereby computation was done has not itself stayed static.
So if I go back into the past, the earliest days of computers, computation was done by means of vacuum tubes.
And for a little while, there was a doubling of computation by means of vacuum tubes.
But there was a point where that just wasn't going to continue.
And so what happened was the transistor appears.
And then there was a doubling of computation by means of the transistor.
And then we've done a series of technical shifts in either the methodology of transistors or et cetera.
We moved from the CPU to the GPU.
There's a bunch of stuff that's happened.
If you look at it, what you then see is you see this really interesting effect where you'll have what looks like an S-curve.
Technology tends to proceed by S-curves where in the beginning it's immature, not well understood.
A lot of ancillary engineering and scientific techniques haven't been either discovered or formalized.
Necessary components in the economy haven't been put together.
So it's sort of proceeding along, usually quite amateurishly or in a failing fashion.
But then it reaches a point of maturity, which is the nape of the curve.
At that point, it begins to accelerate until it achieves, effectively, what's called mainstream.
It becomes the thing.
Think about like cars, right?
Early automobiles were called.
what do you call it, automatic horses or something like that.
They were a niche thing.
At a certain point, though, we had gasoline stations, we had rubber tires, we had enough roads that it became click.
All the pieces fit together, automobiles become a mature technology and they accelerate up.
And then there's a point where that actually becomes, it enters into old age.
It becomes less and less relevant.
And oftentimes it'll actually just die.
So if you take a look at, say, for example, Horse and buggy went through an S-curve.
When the automobile came along, the horse and buggy died, okay?
Same thing happened with, say, the rolling out of vacuum tubes and then certain kinds of transitions.
You see these S-curves.
What you see with Moore's law is you have these nested S-curves, meaning just as the vacuum tube is reaching its old age, the transistor comes along with a more capable possibility towards the more abstract version of things known as Moore's law or computation, substrate independent, okay?
Now, here's the reason why I bring that up.
The same thing is true of civilization.
There's a substrate version of civilization.
Let's go with Babylon.
Babylon has its S-curve.
It rises, it falls.
But there's something bigger going on where the baton of civilization itself gets handed down.
Rome collapses.
The medieval period arises.
Things just move.
And that's actually...
There's something like a progress or an increasing of certain characteristic aspects of civilization, even though we had a loss of a lot of things in the context of Rome.
Eventually, it was caught up across all material factors eventually.
And a lot of other things were done relatively quickly post the fall of Rome.
And so this has two points that I just want to make.
One is falling or death.
has in fact always been woven into the fabric of how we navigate the dynamics of civilization.
Civilizations rise and fall.
The fall clears out a lot of stuff.
A collapse makes new possibility.
The classic, this is now a birth-death cycle dynamic.

**P.Shchelin:**
Flood washes away the old.

**J.Hall:**
The flood washes it away.
But then the other piece, which is this.
We have never once in the human history had a situation where the whole world was entrained so deeply into civilization fabric.
And we are now, in fact, while there is a Chinese civilization that is in the process of bursting forth from late 20th century neoliberalism, and by the way, a Russian civilization is bursting forth and an Indian civilization is bursting forth, which are all actually real independent civilization structures.
There is something about what happened in the late 20th century, in the early 21st, where everything became entangled in such a deep way.
that the collapse of that civilization structure and this is i'm gonna hit two tones one is in fact again unique in human history the magnitude scope and scale of this collapse is like to say the bronze age collapse that covers the whole world

**P.Shchelin:**
just wanted to bring it up

**J.Hall:**
yeah the bronze age collapse is the best one of the better mappings and the height from which we will fall there's the height of that platform is wildly unique And we are so much further away from a substrate level of human endeavor than ever before that a fall of anything vaguely like a Bronze Age level fall or Roman collapse level fall is, we don't have any model for what that would look like.
Most people who've tried to look at it relatively closely, somewhat systematically have said, eh, there's really no recovery.
Like we just fall to 100 million people as just pieces just continue to break, particularly given how people tend to behave when big collapses tend to occur.
but all right so here's the last piece and then we can really move but here's my proposition i am i'm reasonably convinced

**P.Shchelin:**
call it like

**J.Hall:**
90 confident that we're no longer actually even just dealing with a given s-curve but with the mother of all s-curves of civilization itself civilization itself has been on an s-curve since the upper paleolithic or the agricultural revolution picking poison and it has been maintaining over a long haul through a variety of different substrates its own movement and we're not reaching the end of a given civilization but rather reaching the end of civilization itself as a form

**P.Shchelin:**
okay then just straightforward well let's let's dive into it because i think you have to explain now what do you mean by civilization why it's coming down this curve and i want to quote you from the doubt 2023 you wrote we are now for the first time of history at a moment where the core driver of civilization breakouts the city beginning to break down i would love you to answer them or highlight two questions so why the city is the core driver of civilization what is so important about the city and why is it breaking down

**J.Hall:**
All right.
So I am going to assume now that you know your audience because this is, we're going deep, which is great.

**P.Shchelin:**
I love it.
We're going deep.
Yeah, we're going deep.

**J.Hall:**
Okay.
So, and here I'll also specifically call out like hashtag all Kings North because he's recently been doing some really, really good stuff about the tension, a deep tension.
And I think he's correct.
A deep tension between the notion of Christian and the notion of civilization.
which i'm going to hopefully enrich that thinking and most recently the notion of western civilization and christian okay so what do i mean by civilization there's a lot of stuff on the outside but i'm actually just going to focus on the piece that you put right in the center which is this nature of the city here's the thesis um it it turns out it is in fact been it discovered empirically that cities behave differently than the natural phenomena.
So if you take a look at the way that natural phenomena look, there's roughly two classes.
There are natural phenomena that are governed by the laws of thermodynamics, like sands from an hourglass or the freezing of water.
And it's largely the dissipation of energy against some particular gradient or stochastic, just chance, a couple of different basic curves.
the way that magma cools and forms granite.
This is that kind of regime.
The second regime is largely the regime of life.
And the regime of life actually has a very different set of curves to it.
It behaves differently.
If we look at, say, for example, the relationship between the mass of an organism, which roughly represents the amount of matter that is in the organism, and the metabolism of the organism, which represents the amount of energy process throughput that the organism uses, there is an asymptotic curve, right?
As you double the mass of an animal, you don't double the amount of metabolism.
You actually increase the amount of metabolism by 85%.
So it becomes more efficient over time, for example.
There are limits to it.
Most of those limits are driven by gravity and the ability for...
large organisms to live.
But it holds across a wide variety of different kinds of organisms.
It holds for cells.
It holds for rodents.
It holds for lizards.
It holds, by the way, for trees.
It holds for forests.
It's a profound thing.
It even holds, interestingly enough, for companies.
Groups of humans operating together as corporations behave like biological organisms in this fashion of these kinds of curves.
But then there's a third, which is only seen in human context and specifically in the context of cities.
It does show up in other locations briefly, but cities are really the canonical example.
And what happens in a city, and by the way, this is constant across cultures and across time.
If you double the population of the city, you increase a set of metrics, not all of them, but a set of metrics by 115%.
So you get increasing returns to scale.
Most notably, you get wealth per capita and innovation per capita.
It's increasing faster than the rate of doubling of the per capita.
So if I take a city and I go from like a thousand person, very small town, and I double the 2,000, 4,000, 8,000, 16,000, you're getting to the point where a person who's living in, let's say, a hundred thousand person city will.
the average person will tend to make something like three times as much and produce three times as much innovation as exactly the same person in the smaller city.
And it seems to be entirely driven by the fact that they're in the city.
Now, this is empirical.
What I'm about to add next is my own thesis.
And we'll see.
This is the thesis I'm proposing.
Basically, the idea is that there's something going on in the way that minds are able to collaborate.
Something going on in the, say, the transcendent that is different than what happens at the level of the physical or, say, even the eminent, the embodied.
And that when minds enter into a relationship with other minds, they are able to produce innovation, they are able to produce wealth, they are able to produce new insights on the basis of this exponential growth.
This period doubling increases by 15%.
Now, that's an incredibly powerful engine.
It's novel in the world, right?
Nothing else in the world seems to behave like that.
And that's a high leveler.
It leverages heavily.
Left to its own devices, the logic of that is that eventually all bodies, all human bodies, would congregate into a single giant city.
But here's the rub.
We're bodies.
Our bodies are constrained by things like how do we get access to food?
How do we get access to air?
How do we get access to sunlight?
How do we get access to the way to move waste out of the city or the location that we're in?
Space.

**P.Shchelin:**
That was an important element.
Space.

**J.Hall:**
Space, yeah, exactly.
We are physically embodied in space and, by the way, in time.
And so we are constrained by the nature and the mineral world of the previous two regimes as we're endeavoring to do this.
So the problematic of civilization.
has been when humans became entrained to the potency of this collaborative power within the context of the constraints of their ability to actually concentrate people in collaboration.
And so you take a look at a given city, let's go Rome, because that's the one I spent the most time on.
If you look at it, you see three things that are very interesting.
One is everything is converted into territory to serve the needs of Rome.
right so that the hinterlands are no longer wilderness they are farms because they have to be functionally food to move into the center or their water or their minerals right their material that are functional they were converted to functional on the basis of the center second while you have many cities there is in fact a very typical top most significant city at the top of the pyramid.
And then a cluster of two to three cities that are below it that are roughly half its size.
Then a cluster of 16 that are below them that are roughly half their size.
And they tend to be more specialized.
And so in the United States, Chicago is kind of like a mercantile logistics hub.
Los Angeles is an entertainment hub.
New York is the capital.
Now we move the political capital, but that doesn't really matter.
Typically, typically.
Not universally, but typically.
And then the next thing is that this continues as long as it can continue, right?
So you basically have a gambit, you have a game or a challenge where I want to get as many people into a centralized location as possible.
I actually have to distribute them into different physical locations governed by my technological capability, both in terms of being able to get resources in and energy out and in terms of just the limits of my ability to put them together.
So I have to convert them into functional.
adjuncts to the centralized system.

**P.Shchelin:**
Just to illustrate, here comes the roads.
That's why every empire builds roads.

**J.Hall:**
Here comes the roads.
And or canals, and or eventually trains.
Exactly.
Lacking roads, there's only so much I can do.
Oh wait, if I smooth out the land and make it more level, I can increase my throughput back and forth.
Oh, neat.

**P.Shchelin:**
Awesome.

**J.Hall:**
If I can bring water in, I can increase the number of people who could be in.
Neat.

**P.Shchelin:**
And that's why viaducts.

**J.Hall:**
exactly why and so my ability to produce wealth and innovation is fighting against the actual constraints of the physical environment if I can solve those puzzles to unlock a next stage of growth I get to grow if I can't then I reach some limit And then I end up falling, collapsing in some fashion as this tension starts to break.
As more and more people are coming in, I can't sustain it.
I start getting more and more waste that I can't produce, or I get conflicts internally for scarce resources, and I get a collapse event.
So that's the city, right?
And the city, as you can see, every civilization is ultimately actually the name of a city.
Babylon is a really good way of thinking of it.
Okay, so what's next?

**P.Shchelin:**
Just before we move next, just...
I'm sure you've thought of it, but just again, to my audience, what you've been describing, while you were describing this, I couldn't get rid of a feeling that it was sophisticated, scientific, and eloquently put in technological language, the story of the Tower of Babylon, just to be very clear.
It can be summarized in six paragraphs as it's done in Genesis, but effectively it's the same principle.
You have multiplicity.
like it comes together this multiplicity produce technological innovation the like the bricks as it is in the story and we can see that all technology is in a way a form of a brick

**J.Hall:**
for us

**P.Shchelin:**
then it goes on and on and on and on until it crumbles effectively under its own weight but here yeah like i have a video with ritual trolling on the channel actually too about the bed bones there are many many male layers to it and maybe it will be useful for us to talk about them later but i just want to point out that The problem itself, maybe the scale of the problem nowadays, it's pretty big, but it's interesting that in our stories, the problem is already discussed on this scale, like as the biggest imaginable unity.
What would happen if the biggest imaginable unity comes together?

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, I think this is absolutely correct.
And so, you know, as I sort of have entered into the third phase of my life, let's say, I can read that story.
and go oh right oh and and it's for me very nice because i can point to the world let's say scientifically historically and go yeah that's actually this is not this is not just a really nice symbol it is in fact i can really concretely say here's examples of how it operated and operates okay and so but here's the here's the key point um and the the so i'd like to say to the king's northean side of things which is culture and civilization are not the same.
They're in fact distinct.
And it is not obvious, nor do I think it's in fact, I would say that the logic of the model that I've been producing is that, as I said, civilization as a form is coming to an end.
We're actually reaching the end of that entire arc.
And let me explain a piece of that.
Remember that in the beginning, the proposition was that there was a tension between the generative capability, the exponential collaborative capacity that emerges when you get minds into collaboration, and the challenge of embodiment.
Well, of course, over the last few years, and particularly over the last couple of decades, the power of the digital, among other things, has enabled more and more and more of us to do what you and I are doing.
I don't know if you've noticed, but we're not in the same room.

**P.Shchelin:**
we are unfortunately but we are not i would prefer

**J.Hall:**
i would prefer it is preferable but here's the key it makes a difference we are collaborating our minds are in some meaningful degree of communication right a lot lot lot better than if we were just texting back and forth

**P.Shchelin:**
um

**J.Hall:**
maybe a million times better than if we were sending letters back and forth because the rate is as much faster i can see your facial expressions i can hear the tone of your voice um and so the the critical points of what enables collaboration to occur, which is still embodied, but now we're embodying it in an increasingly ephemeral form, which means that the center of the city is moving.
And I'm just going to assert this.
The center of the city is moving from the place where human bodies do human body things into the virtual.
And I would argue that we've already moved that center or are very close to the moving of that center.
And when that occurs, it's very interesting.
I think, in fact, it's ultimately really, really good, though by no means not fraught.
It is fraught with risk, but it's nonetheless very, very good.
And here's the shift.
Once you have liberated the body from the tyranny of being forced into unnatural proximity, the city is a deeply unnatural proximity.
it's not healthy for human beings

**P.Shchelin:**
because i think that was kind of missed in the previous uh statement that city itself is not natural like as as an not as an idea but as a phenomenon like we are biologically and socially are not really meant to live in the cities and that's why again it's interesting that in a scripture city has this very ambivalent role like abraham leaves the cities like and it's there is a constant call like exit the babylon exit the city like so there is like book of exodus like so there is always this tension of it and it i don't think it's uh on empty spot and your line of argument is another way of highlighting why there is an internal tension of certain need to exit the city so yeah yeah

**J.Hall:**
and there's and there's there's many many right the the psychological the physiological and the spiritual consequences of the city are profound and almost entirely negative But the material benefit of forcing people into that space is very powerful.
And so we've kind of been imposed under the tyranny of that.
But as soon as that center moves into the virtual, it's like imagine if the sun somehow just disappeared and the planets were no longer governed by the gravitational pull of the sun.
Somehow we were able to maintain warmth.
But just look at that.
Think about that from a physical point of view.
There's some new center, some new gravitational center that's going to ultimately become that which governs maybe Jupiter or maybe the planets disappear.
But the point is, in our case, in fact, a new center has emerged.
The new center is now, however beautifully, pulling in two different directions.
One direction is human beings are going to be doing what we've been doing, which is finding ways to get better and better at entering into collaboration in the virtual, which I'm going to tag that and come back to that in a second.
And, however, we then are now going to begin noticing more and more that we're becoming liberated to reorient our physical bodies in natural contexts.
And so we'll begin to actually live with our families, for example, form extended kin groups in places where everybody actually feels like the place they're in is a good place, taking responsibility for the natural environment we're in, because that's just obviously good from the point of view of beauty, from the point of view of health.
And by the way, noticing something like continuity again, where we sort of reestablish a sense of timelessness that is still in time, like time and timelessness connecting properly.
We're almost getting back to that point of eternity in Kairos.
And we're already beginning to notice this.
And my proposition is that we will begin to notice it more and more and more as the legacy inertia of urbanism begins to fade.
And as more and more and more people are able to move into places that more align with their more natural proclivities, we will notice things like their birth rates will go up.
Just as simple as that, like just run the math on that.
People who live in natural places where they are, you know, there are groups of people who care for each other deeply and will care for newborn baby women feel comfortable will have decided to have children birth rates will go up and the cities will collapse out of just sheer

**P.Shchelin:**
lack of producing and just just strengthen simply there is space to bring the children up like you're not confined to your 50 square meter like right 30 square meter cell in a megapolis exactly like it's not exactly a child encouraging environment

**J.Hall:**
and just think like we have fresh air running around nature all the good vital things that will make a human being be things like will be interested in meeting other people and interested in capable of mating and all that other good stuff so and there's a lot more but you can see like how these i suspect deeply these transitions will begin to move and then you know the key challenge is how do we hold these two points in proper harmony how do we hold the virtual and the physical which I think now we can say how do we hold the transcendent and the imminent in proper harmony, becomes the question.
So I would argue strongly that we are in fact just flat out at the end of civilization under the terms of its own logic, regardless of anything that we would like to do.
That's just, we can't help it.
We're just at that stage.
But what that looks like is very much an open question.

**P.Shchelin:**
Oh.
Well, several thoughts immediately come to mind.
One, I think, is crucial, that from my perspective on a philosophical level, we do have an answer.
Like, it's an old answer, but I think it's an answer to be rediscovered.
And you mentioned the tension between, effectively, virtual and material, you can say, and the true bridge answer.
And in my opinion, not just in my opinion, here I'm just repeating, effectively, what is...
well-known orthodox theology and like it's the antidote to both because virtual is not real enough and material is not spirited enough is symbolic like symbol is something which you embody like the problem of embodiment so giving the immaterial meaning because all meanings are immaterial by nature to sense a meaningless matter and that's exactly what our human if you want to say superpower or calling or duty or cross was from the very beginning we are meant to give exactly the meaning to the matter and uh to connect to connect heaven and earth first but then you will have i think the very because to summarize the argument effectively you're saying the city wasn't is not good by itself but only by a very specific function which is which is which it enables and this function is of communication and communication enables collaboration and with the development of new technology for the first time we can at least conceive moving this constructive beneficial element of a city into the virtual space and leaves the negative element of it behind but I want to connect the problem of communication not exactly the problem but I think what enables communication it's not just the closed proximity and that's what I think is the key because I don't think it's a coincidence in English that communication and communion are very closely connected words.
I think you can properly communicate and collaborate only as long as you have a certain level of communion between people who are entering in a certain paradigm of relation.
And one way of doing it, you can think, was doing it in a very mean fashion, artificially, but holding everyone together, let's say.
it is form of communion maybe not exactly voluntarily maybe not exactly nicely done but it is what will happen when you move virtually it is an open question that's when i think is basically the kingswardian as you put it element comes into comes into play because can you have the culture without communion for example my answer would be no because i think as far as i understand the culture it is effectively a religion culture cult religion so what unites people in a certain culture it is a common common cult like if you want to put it this way and this will present and this does present a realizing challenge for the transition like i'm not arguing with you that the transition has already happened i do agree with you it's like there is inertia and there is a way of looking at it but i totally on you that the city in a way it was conceived and it wasn't yeah for millennia the cornerstone of civilization had lost it had already lost its importance and it's just the nature of habit or thinking time but it will it will collapse pretty quickly maybe in the next decade already like depending on the speed but speed is a question but then the true problems i think will emerge the true problem is effect is the problem of communion the problem of symbols what are the what are this in material symbols which are holding our decentralized place together the problem of violence and because it's exactly the problem of unity and multiplicity on another scale and uh you especially after your baptism i think you kind of it's not a new thought for you for you but also for the audience in the same manner that antidote for war is not peace but liturgy kind of the antidote for civilization is not barbarism and but church and that's where I think we will have the true challenge because we spent 400 years running exactly from this ontology and it's pretty challenging for us even just to pronounce these words not in a context of a very particular confined space which we kind of put a you know spiritual reservation okay that's a kind of spiritual reservation but it has nothing to do with the rest of our life whereas and correct me if I'm wrong effectively what you end up not proposing but observing is like To exit the crisis of civilizations, you will not just have to embrace it, but you have to make this the part of everything.

**J.Hall:**
Yes, I think this is right.
So this is, I think, quite beautiful.
I don't know if you've noticed, but we've actually, in our conversation, actually moved through these phases.
So now we're sitting in the Christian phase.
So let's begin to use that language.
So one of the things that I have noticed in the nature of how the adversary or the serpent operates is that he tries to give us back the thing that he has taken by his own means.
So when we fall from eternity, the serpent bites his own tail and gives us the closed circle and says, well, that's eternity, right?
It's infinite.
You can keep going around it.
Similarly, the alternative to say true communion.
which is what this particular version of the adversary can give us, I call temptation.
So communion is when a multiplicity is in fact brought together into a well-integrated unity, a proper whole.
Temptation is when a bunch of pieces are put together, are brought together into a non-well-integrated whole.
Like a simple example is like a snowball.
or even a santa ball i can i can with enough force right with enough material generated wealth and innovation i can hold a non-integrated multiplicity into something kind of like communion but i'm going to call it temptation right and so And this is one of the reasons why civilizations collapse, is they don't actually have a true center.
They don't actually have a true communion that holds them together as a thing that is actually whole.
They are held together by some other kinds of forces.
And as those forces reach the end of their binding strength, the real natural state is they're apart.
And of course, remember, the history of civilization has in fact been cosmopolitan imperialism, which is...
quite explicitly, the bringing together of parts into something like a non-well-integrated whole, usually by some combination of force and wealth.

**P.Shchelin:**
Complicated.
Some not good faith, some good faith.
I would be less critical and say there was always duality of this.
Because you can say that every time historical empire emerges, like starting from Persian Empire into the Roman Empire.
Yes, there is wealth, coercion, force, like history is written of it.
But also then there is within it much more voluntarily element of pieces joining together as we tend to think.
Like there is a very internal dynamic of like things trying to fall apart and things trying to not fall apart.
And yes, what you're saying does play a role every time, but it's not justice.
Because when you bring crowds and you bring this infrastructure, it's not just you keep the cities together.
But you're exactly stopping the, let's say, three kingdoms fighting each other.
There is this, like, now we are all over us.
It was effectively the Persian model, because all continental empires are built over it.
So how Cyrus is the great, he stopped the internal squabbling and created the empire.
And this dynamic, I think, is very important to keep up on the mind.

**J.Hall:**
Beautiful.
I'm going to propose that this is ultimately grounded in the Tower of Babel, because Cyrus is the great.
Cyrus is, by means of human ingenuity, human will, human design, producing something which is a simulacrum of communion that does throw off a very large number of benefits, not the least of which is something like lowercase p, peace, lowercase w, wealth, all of which are real, but all of which are also separate or different from what the King of Kings is proposing.
and we can do this there's lots of different variations on this you can also talk about the difference of like capital j judgment and accusation judgment brings things into a proper balance separates that which needs to be separated accusation breaks apart things that in fact should be together so um i think this is and so let's say so the there's a mania is that right yeah there's a certain mania it's a perfect is actually perfectly identified as a mania to the degree to which humans particularly ones who identify as or endeavor to be great even if they don't think of themselves as great endeavor to produce this kind of pseudo communion by means of human skillfulness technique methodology which by the way of course then means on the right hand shoulder is in fact the adversary then they are ultimately participating in the same sensibility of the tower of babel uh

**P.Shchelin:**
have you read the i imagine you read the goethe faust

**J.Hall:**
yes yes i've been thinking about him a lot in the past few days actually

**P.Shchelin:**
well it is exactly the story so you're trading your reason like like in the very beginning like basically you're getting the power of you're trading your soul for the super power of reason over material reality and in the second half of the book which people rarely read because won't get boring but by the end like it's interesting that what he ends up is a megalomaniac civilizational project yeah do you remember that he tries to build the system of canals and dams and the only thing which was standing in his way was just this little cottage with two old people who just didn't want to move out to build his megalomaniac uh common good project and that's how kind of when falling apart happens

**J.Hall:**
yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah i think it's just very there is something in it like connects it to what you're talking about.

**J.Hall:**
And you could do an interesting case study if I just think about the Napoleonic archetype and this notion, or the Julian line.
It even has to be an individual.
The migration from Augustus through to Nero shows the same dynamic happening intergenerationally.
I mean, it seems to be a thing that happens for reasons that I think we would notice.
So then we're calling to the deeper, right?
The communion is at the ground.
And of course, we have advantage of the ability to have access to communion, proper true communion.
And true communion is that to which we have yearned.
And the question is, how are we able to find, how do we say this right?
In this moment that we are afforded, where simultaneously the tyranny of civilization is in a process of breaking, so we're in a kind of free fall, and where everything is necessary.
The necessity is as high as it could possibly be.
How are we able to find a way to be drawn towards true communion and not to be lured into simulated or false communion?
And I think this notion of symbolism, this notion of the proper role of human in bringing together heaven and earth.
And King's North, I think, again, I just want to orient him.
Civilization is over, brother.
You don't have to worry about it.
Yes, you're right.
We're done.
What comes next is not atavistic.
What comes next is a qualitatively different thing of what it looks like when we're actually able to choose to live in accordance with true communion, and they come from there.
And of course, in this case, true communion is communion horizontally, but most importantly, vertically, right?
The horizontal happens because the vertical happens.
And the vertical happens individually and collectively.
So each individual is in communion vertically through the son into the father.
The group comes together.
The group now forms the church, which are all in communion as the son with the father.
I mean, it's a very complex thing that happens.
And I can't say that this is sort of like capital T, the thing, the kingdom of heaven.
But I can say that.
the thing that we would be speaking of when we mentioned the kingdom of heaven is the direction the only possible valid direction always has been but in this case quite concretely and we can even begin to notice methodologies like how do we actually what does it even look like here's an example that's one thing i

**P.Shchelin:**
wanted to bring up

**J.Hall:**
um when we think about the virtual i can put the virtual here and then i can put the spiritual over here They're clearly not the same, but they're weirdly proximal.
I can think of the minimum viable embodiment of, let's just use math, as a very easy, concrete way to think about something that participates more in the spiritual than most things.
The minimum viable embodiment of math happens to show up in the virtual.
I can take two numbers and I can add them together in software, in a computer.
or frankly even just in my head but in a computer particularly and what i'm doing is something in computer science one might even say is the study of the limit of embodiment the minimum viable embodiment that allows the actual embodied relationship with the transcendent which is a weird priesthood but maybe that's exactly what we need to do catechize all computer scientists

**P.Shchelin:**
that definitely will help at least with something given some demonic elements in it.
And I'm not over-exaggerating.
You know that better.
The type of people sometimes...
No, I just want to come back to it and suggest the way I understand it.
Exactly speaking about the difference between virtual and symbolical.
What is the connection and where the difference happens.
And it is linguistic, so maybe you can agree with the principle but try to explain differently.
to me when i try to explain the difference between virtual and exactly let's say spiritual is uh if uh virtual is uh so both are immaterial what i think is very important like what is the common parameter between them is that they're both immaterial it is true but where are the differences at least another understanding and another treatment we treat virtual in material at least We claim to treat virtual and material as something not real enough or not real at all.
Whereas spiritual is super real.
It is beyond real.
So both are immaterial.
But it's kind of the choice.
You can move into illusion, simulation of reality, which by definition is not reality.
Simulation of something is not the thing.
So simulation of reality is not reality.
Whereas spiritual...
and is more, it's more than real.
It's real beyond real, if you want to put it this way.
And I think here comes like practical solution, what we have to do and collectively and individually, et cetera, right at this stage of flood.
I do agree we are in the process of flood of the city turning into maybe seaview as you propose, maybe flood will be longer, not know yet.
But at this stage, it's important to look for the right words.
Like that's an old principle.
Because I do think we have, on a linguistic level, a lot of mess, to put it mildly.
Not being even able to properly converse about the most quintessential matters.
It is a big challenge.
And here, rediscovery of the language of old is actually helpful.
Because the more you go into the tradition, especially of the first Christianity of the first millennium, the more you read the writings of St.
Basil, St.
Maximus, and Gregory, you would be surprised how...
as i'm talking about this exactly the same effectively problems we are talking right now like yes the language sounds a little like quite differently but once you move past beyond your first let's say reaction you would you would see this much more close and that's just as experience of people since writing about this not material but super real things and that changes your understanding

**J.Hall:**
okay so notice we're actually doing again we're becoming self-referential and i think we can combine things really beautifully so language.
Okay.
And the medium of expression, that's actually even a better way of putting it.
So if I'm reading Basil, I am communing with him by means of a medium of expression.
That medium of expression has at least two elements.
One, as you say, is in fact the way that the transcendent is embodying itself in a particular instantiation.
The word hypostasis is good here.
The way the transcendent is hypostatically bound to the material, to the world, in the form of the language, the Greek language, and secondarily, but not separately, in the form of the actual transmission of the written word to my eyeball, the physicality of the written word.

**P.Shchelin:**
And the third, there is a third, and the third is you, the matter of perception.
And that's what I, it's a matter of a subject because I think that's one topic we didn't talk yet about in what is crucial in this transition is the whole re-understanding of the problem, not problem, but the reality of the subject, because it's how you perceive certain things.
It's very ironic that we live in the age, which pretends that everything is subjective, but effectively there is no real place for subjects.
There is no true recipient like of this.
Yeah.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah.
Well, let's do it just right now, like right between us.
This is perfect.
Right.
So you.
Or a subject.
I am a subject.
What we're trying to figure out how to do is to come into a relationship of connection at the level of the transcendent subjective.
In the interior of me, in the interior of you, we can somehow find the same location in the mind of God.
We're having to use this virtual medium.
Which, by the way, now has this really interesting characteristic of being, if we were in the same physical space, we may actually be still saying we're using a virtual medium, using air and light and sound to orient our physical bodies as instrumentalities of our will, soul, and spirit, ultimately allowing us to orient at the level of our spiritual into connection.
And there's something about that, like liturgy, that is liturgy, that is liturgy, that's all liturgy is, is that.
And so to render the virtual liturgical, I would say, is the cardinal challenge of the moment that we're in.
So I'll take it up a notch.
Kingsworth has correctly pointed out that if we're operating at the level of Christian civilization, we're actually not even thinking clearly.
Civilization, fortunately, is coming to an end.
And there's nothing about the endeavoring to reconstitute it as a Christian that's going to be.
meaningful at all and may have negative consequences will will have negative consequences for the christian side but okay we're now moving into a new place in this new place we are now able to quite clearly see that the thing that we are endeavoring to always do is convert the virtual and here now i'm including all forms of the imminent into the liturgical because the effort is always as you say and your arrow is exactly right if our arrow is pointing down from the spiritual to the embodied to the virtual then we're moving towards the less than less real we can actually instead of making it like one two three it's just a continuum of less than less real in some sense all we're trying to do is convert that to some something about the nature of the fact that we are physical we have an earth the creation is created there's a reason for it and we have a role to play in it part of our role to play in it is to come into relationships with each other by means of the created by means of the virtual by means of the physical by means of the imminent in order to allow us to connect at the level of the spiritual and up and up and up right you and i when we connect at the level of the spiritual something else happens is that the holy spirit is there with us watching right whenever we're together in his name in his name capital n name then he is with us right and so that is the that is it like that's the challenge it's funny because i can split that challenge in two ways one challenge is that is actually just the thing that we're here to do full stop it always has been and also it is the only viable approach to solve the problem of the catastrophe of the transition from civilization

**P.Shchelin:**
great uh i really like the way you combined it in the end like yeah i do agree it's not like obviously but it is the only way out of this meta crisis which we started our conversation because and that's why it's important to first step to recognize it as such you're doing it on like your work and podcast but that's why i think this conversation today was very important because so far it is not that easy let me put it this way because exactly 400 years of legacy is huge like and we can look even deeper we we can look even deeper beyond it but let's say that at least the last iteration of this capital seed civilization is the modernity which is the particular very particular version of the same civilization which has very particular understanding of reality per se which has led to which has been replicated over 400 years like even though being parasitical in nature it provided less gigantic material boons and often it isn't it is funny because often when like i talk about these problems with even my like students or clients uh often fear and i think you might have exactly in your life as well that okay so do you propose that we go into let's say just immediate courses and destroy like basically ludism like like the idea when you're talking about the collapse of the civilization you're talking immediately about ludism and that the idea of this material technological progress is embedded into civilization an honest answer is yes it is but not just and i think that's what you've been trying to show like it is embedded but it's not the connection is not just linear connection and it's not straightforward connection

**J.Hall:**
and it's not it's not it's not it's not anything

**P.Shchelin:**
essential

**J.Hall:**
it is not essential in this in this sense meaning um technological innovation is what causes civilization not the other way around and that there are ways to achieve technological innovation that are separate from civilization.

**P.Shchelin:**
Wow, that's big.
Yeah, I think that's the key.
Whereas so far, at least, we've been only highlighting, at least in a, let's say, secular discourse, we've only been highlighting the constructive material elements of civilization as a facilitator of the technological process.
and been really neglecting this spiritual, but also, you can say, immaterial problems civilization entails by itself, which was always preserved in a tradition, at least.
But not just a Christian tradition.
Most of the traditions globally are very cautious about the problems of civilizations.
Even being a simple question of the more small and big cities, and we have the tablets from Babylonian age, people complaining about it.
But even on a bigger level, because there is a certain, like we didn't go deep into it, but there is a certain price you have to pay in a city of exactly, effectively nominalistic price.
You need to atomize yourself.
Like nominalism, you know what nominal is.
Nice.

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, absolutely.
But that's really a good phrase.
The nominalistic price is beautiful.
You can almost feel like you can feel that selling of the soul sensibility.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah.
And that's exactly the challenge, because the problem is, even though we managed to create a really good, let's say, I don't know, multiplicators, transistors, etc.
Let's say for every X element of you, you're getting more and more material, and hence now we live in the wealthiest material civilization ever existed.
We live as kings.
Let's be straightforward.
Even the poorest, maybe not the poorest man of us, but the poorest man in America lives...
like a king, by material standards of the civilizational age.
But the price you had to pay is the most lonely people ever walked the planet Earth.
And there is this intrinsic connection.
And I absolutely agree with you that I think that is exactly the lie and the deal, which is kind of proposed to us that you can have this, but only with this.
These two things are separate.
And it takes time to really realize.
whether they are how they connect it what is the connection i think you've been doing it very beautifully but thank

**J.Hall:**
you

**P.Shchelin:**
but this nominalistic price just to hammer down this point and i think it's important we need to understand that it is one of the reasons why this civilization is ending because by its very nature it is limited there is only so much humanness in any per every particular human you can give you already effectively given your nation like i'll say you're mostly given your culture you're mostly given your nation you mostly have given away your family like because we can talk a lot about the structure

**J.Hall:**
absolutely

**P.Shchelin:**
age like to an extent and sex go on into this and the only thing left basically it's i would say this right life itself like this whole question of like just living like physically like producing you know chemical and physical elements but basically we've given up almost everything for this current price without really realizing it there is not much more to give but the imperative of constant doubling is not disappeared so it simply cannot make the next step without collapsing so just even on this symbolic level It makes total sense what you've been describing in a technical terms.

**J.Hall:**
Wow, yeah, that's beautiful.
And it's wild because, as you say, if I take that lens, that way of looking at it, and I trace all the way back all these different elements of the poly crisis, we can see that they actually all show their symptoms of the same thing.
So I can say, okay, let me look at the debasement of the currency.
Oh, okay, I get it.
This maps.
This is what's happening.
Counterfeiting everything becoming counterfeit currency, that's what's happening.
When I take a look at stories.
know let's just take a look at something like i don't know even just like something as banal as star wars and the strip mining of star wars for over time like to the degree to which a teenager a jewish teenager in the 1930s could produce something uh connected to the divine in the form of marvel Or I guess he's in the 40s.
And then the strip mining of that into the super salient, the purely super salient with no soul left over, like 99.99% pure stimulus.
And then your 0.0001% soul.
There's a point in which the whole thing just topples over and you're seeing that food.
We see it everywhere.
It's weird, actually.
If you think about it, it's like, wow, it's weird that it would show up so mechanistically independent, like everything.
And I can just think about it right and notice how that happens.
Okay, so there we go.

**P.Shchelin:**
Yeah, so to sum it up, we do live in a very interesting age and in a very interesting time.
I do think we do live in a metacrisis.
And just to sum it up, not to sum it up, a final thought, since we have a little bit more time, and it's something you told me before we started the recording, to end it on a more positive note, I do think if there is one big spark of positivity in all of this mess, is that we do have appetite.
and what is even more important maybe or equally as important capacity to at least look beyond this uh let's say puzzle the presented unescapable puzzle the appetite is that i do think we want to leave and that's what coming back to the problem of crisis like the crisis will reveal whether we want to leave or we want to die you're gonna say this is the only question we've been like another personal life and civil and cultural life and like from the beginning to the end but the question of life versus death and communion is the ultimate form of life whether let's say babylon tower is the ultimate form of civilization but death like so that's all coming together and if we want to leave we do have we do have an appetite for it and there is so many thinkers and facilitators and material things happening right now which I only think are exactly liking the right words I honestly think based on our conversation and you and previous conversations we had like in private and like with other people we are much more developed materially than we think we are like it's exactly the question of that feels like it's exactly the question of direction it's exactly the question of finding the right way of expressing this and directing exactly this element and for the and for quite a while it was numb.
Let's be realistic.
It was good enough, so why bother?
But as in many different stories, the flood is coming.
The flood is the fact that we already came.
The fire, you can say, has already been happening.
And it's only the question of us, what we're going to do with it.
Maybe do you want to conclude in some way or just reflect on the whole journey we had over the last year?

**J.Hall:**
Yeah, I mean, the sense that I notice is that every time there's been this revelation, the word revelation that you put in, or the revelatory experience of crisis, every time the crisis has come to enough of a head to force people to look at it squarely.
some number of people have had some quality of revelation and that, that desire to live.
And by the way, that more even deeper, that desire to come to communion, this is put it very, very clearly.
That's the actual desire or the desires to come into communion.
You know, we've been turned upside down inside out and been put in blindfolds and somebody has lit a fire.
over there to make it feel like that's the sun but the reality is we desire communion and as the crisis comes to a peak more people have some set of revelations that orients them towards trying to find their way back onto the right path and that's the good news

**P.Shchelin:**
well it is thank you very much I think it was absolutely fascinating and wonderful topic, conversations, which we only touch the tips of the iceberg, but I think the very fact that we had it, and I'm really grateful for you to coming because exactly, I will be honest, a little bit of your background, like of this big tech, you know, very, what we consider to be the most modern and even super modern, post-modern man, and the very fact of you talking about these problems in the manner you do.
and understanding them and reacting towards them it's an effect symbolic like it is an effect symbolic like that this personal journey of reaching to a certain height but also it's kind of in a way the certain low and effectively making the certain jump through it like as a symbol just to finish like i think it is very symbolic to the whole meta crisis and my personal story and your personal story remember that in dante but i think it's one of the most fascinating uh small details in the whole story that the exit from hell is on its very bottom like it's effectively right right and right behind the person like the ninth circle and then the dante ends up being walked into the purgatory well i think in a way like what is happening right now is a little bit akin to this story and then it is positive element to it so thank you very much for coming

**J.Hall:**
yeah really delighted um i'm really excited to see what happens as a result of this conversation

**P.Shchelin:**
well hope we will have more that will be very very beautiful

**J.Hall:**
great
