# On Fasts and Feasts. Conversation with John Heers @heavythingslightly

March 21, 2025 [Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n757EwjrN6o) 01:02:12

**P.Shchelin:**
Okay.
Hello, dear audience.
Today, I have a special guest, which I would like to invite you to participate in our conversation with.
This guest is John Hears.
And John is one of the most welcoming persons I've ever met.
He is one of the best hosts in the most general meaning of the world.
host like both as a podcast holder both as a tamada which we will talk about it later and he's my dear friend so welcome you i will like to welcome you on my channel

**J.Heers:**
it is a joy we got a lot to talk about

**P.Shchelin:**
exactly and what i want to talk about today generally speaking is connected with the season so we are recording this conversational this conversation several weeks before lent and this year is a special year when lent starts more or less the same for all denominations and that's why i think it's a really good occasion to talk about feast and fast and the interesting dance that happens between these two phenomenons as on all levels of reality but i want to start with more joyous thing like so As an expert on feasting, John, how would you describe a feast?
What is an essence of a feast and why it matters nowadays?
How would you say it is?

**J.Heers:**
I start with my spiritual father in the Russian tradition of Rokor.
He was sitting with me.
This is when I was a young Orthodox Christian, a convert from Protestantism, Episcopalian.
In the United States.
And he said.
He was with two other single guys.
And.
We were talking about.
My potential wife.
And I was very.
The best way to describe it.
Is I was serious about my faith.
Maybe to a fault.
I was zealous.
And I was very interested.
If she could do it.
Be orthodox.
And he said.
I want to ask you a question.
How does she feast?
And I was like confused.
But how does she feast?
What does it look like?
And I didn't know the answer.
I had never really talked about the importance of sacrifice as toward a proper communion and the outcome being a beautiful family through the dedication to Christ.
And we could go on and on.
But I had never taken this question seriously.
And it was during this time period that I left.
I didn't marry this woman.
I went to Georgia, the Georgian Republic, where I got.
I got trained in hospitality and orthodoxy.
Long story short, I think the answer is that a feast is the intimation of heaven.
And the intimation of heaven is the ultimate, it's how we know hope.
And so I don't understand people who don't naturally gravitate toward feast.
as the ultimate moment of hope.
And so now there's drunkenness, guilty.
There's all kinds of guilty.
There's all kinds of problems with the feast, but there's all kinds of problems with the fast.
And so I think it's just what happens when people hope is that they want to set a table.
They want something to overflow.
And in Orthodox theology, it's Pascha, right?
And Christ isn't contained in the grave.
So there's an overflow.
And the Georgians taught me there should always be more on the table than you can eat.
And for an American ear trained in efficiency and pragmatism, it doesn't make sense.
It's like there's too many remainders.
You know, two plus two is four.
Why do we have all these remainders?
And I think the nature of the feast is to have excess.
Because there's no reason we should have excess, Pavel.
I'm interested in you as a philosopher.
What is the philosophical explanation of more than we need?
Have you ever thought about that?
It's a very hard question to answer.

**P.Shchelin:**
It is.

**J.Heers:**
You know, like God exists as more.
God exists as beyond.
And so in some ways, the nature of our existence is the beyond.
We are meant to have more than we can imagine.
And the feast is an intimation of that.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, I never thought truth be told about this in a way, like in a philosophical manner.
But your question brought several associations, which I will share and we'll see where it goes.
First, I think.
I think during the feast and more it's a very good reminder that any movement per se like any movement generally speaking in physical reality or in a human social reality is a consequence of a form of desire like and so you desire something you move towards what is desirable so in a way the desire creates movement and the tricky part about it don't even think about it properly on the one hand a human desire is insatiable you one can say so like it's never truly enough but it's almost never truly enough in our imagination it's like almost in illusions in simulacrums if you want to put it this way in virtual reality whenever face you with real reality suddenly you surprise you almost always have enough you have enough of human communication you have enough of human interaction you have enough of food you have enough of water etc etc so but ironically like if we're talking about a little bit adding theological aspect to it god is something which is never enough like you can definitely so it's something which is always keeps feeling the one who desires it so it's one i i don't remember which holy father said but effectively it's never ending movement like it's never ending the movement of desire i think it's kind of similar in dante's allegory like of uh heaven like that there is a constant movement around the sun or something like this so in a sense in an excess in a good feast like in a i will highlight in a good feast feast which purpose is not to get drunk for the drunkenness sake but this which is the purpose which is ordered to a higher purpose is to remind us that we still have a gigantic work to do in a heart expansion exercise to actually be capable of desiring more of a good things and being capable of keeping them that's what kind of thought which hit me like when you ask the question I think it's I think there is sort of connection here like because we're so trained in ironically like we're trained both neither in access nor in moderation I would put it this way we're really trained in this very awkward flat line gray zone if you want to put it and any breakage of this great zone is equally a challenge.
I just recently have been with a good friend of ours, which has been to Art of Tamada today, so back in Kyle, and that's what I kind of thought struck me there is that I think it's not a coincidence that in a culture of the new world, as you describe it, it's equally challenging for us to fast and to feast.
And there is some very interesting direction happening here.
I don't know.

**J.Heers:**
You think philosophically it's played out in the role of the guest and the host.
So one of the drawbacks, I call them light people.
And so this is my sub stack and other places where I like to try to express our work.
Yeah, good.
The light people is a play, of course.
on enlightenment, but also on this category called whiteness.
And we can get into that.
I'm not sure that that category is real.
I think it exists mostly as a modern phenomenon.
But let's just, light people are folks who have been trained to imagine in a Cartesian way that the answers are all found in our discursive thoughts.
And there's something about the feasting that i've done and been blessed to be a part of which is often georgian but not just georgian lived in africa west africa east africa there's something about the intimation of eternity when someone is sitting you down and giving you so much that you start to feel uncomfortable now a light person feels uncomfortable let me try to explain this i want to play around with this for me a light person, let's call him a modern inheritor of the enlightenment, European enlightenment.
There's something about us that we're taught to be self-sufficient as an act of goodness.
It's like, because I am self-sufficient, I am also good.
Which, of course, is not a Christian narrative at all.
So when the host starts to act like God, and I find this in Islam too, when i live with muslims when the host starts to present like a god in other words it's more than you can imagine it feels like they're giving from even from things they can't give from in other words they're poor and yet they they lavish you a light person starts to feel very uncomfortable um at least i do i'm one of those people i'm always trying to be less of one but i'm not saying they're bad i'm not saying but the enlightenment has problems so Let me ask you a question, if any of these presuppositions are correct.
When I start to feel bad, I'm not playing a proper role of the guest, which is the acceptance of the grace, which is exactly the same role between God and I.
If I imagine myself as self-sufficient, which is a bit of a Protestant theology, then I can imagine myself as sort of equal to the host, the host being God.
Now I have a...
I'm a disordered guest.
I haven't come to receive.
I've come to add to my host.
I find all of this very interesting.
I think it's all tied up with feasting.
I don't always know how.
We can work it out.
But there's something about the role of the guest in our world in the West that is not allowed a proper feasting because we don't allow the host to be truly a host.

**P.Shchelin:**
What do you think about that?
I think you...
actually touched a very deep point very deep illusion we all share as guests and we're in a way all guests to the feast of life if you if you let me this metaphor i think it's an illusion of control i think it's an illusion of self-control like we want to believe and to act as if it's true that we are in control of our lives and the trick is we are but not in the way we think we are like you're in control you are in control of your life precisely no matter you can be a good guess that's upon you you're in control of your life and then like the way you order your heart like you can really like that's highly upon you like the way you exactly push your heart expand your heart move beyond this you know like it's even you know bastardized and you know pop up psychology like get out of the comfort zone but in a way it is get out of your comfort zone

**J.Heers:**
right it's built on something true that concept

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah exactly so and this true concept is like we have this illusion which we build this walls around ourselves this atomization because at least within this wall i believe i can control everything that happens and nothing bad can happen to me or if it's happening bad it's because i'm bad or something like it's the result of my lack of control and a true feast as you've been talking is a challenge exactly to this if you're coming as a like ideally if you're coming as a guest you don't know what you will be served like exactly like you maybe some most general understanding but you don't know exactly what you will serve like you don't know who exactly will be there like

**J.Heers:**
how long how long you don't

**P.Shchelin:**
know how long You don't know how long it's going to take.
All these small details, but you are not in control.
You are part of this thing, but you are not in control of this thing.
And it is challenging, legitimately, for us.
It can be really, really challenging.
So I think it's connected with this idea of control.
But then the life itself is not controlled.
You don't control whether you're sick or...

**J.Heers:**
This is it.
It really does...
It does speak of...
The integration of theology with practical life, which is what I really appreciate by a lot of these guys on the internet now

**P.Shchelin:**
who are

**J.Heers:**
managing to take, you're one of them, who are managing to take very difficult ideas that seem to be far away and really relate them to our everyday existence.
Because this also will speak to how we meet our neighbor, right?
In other words, feasting and fasting is also about neighbor to neighbor relationships because I got to talk to this guy.
How long do I have to spend with him?
There's this attitude we always need to get back to what I can control.
And what I can control is what I'm going to watch, what I'm going to eat.
I think it's a major, I would not even say a major problem.
What I would say is that the core of what people in the West.
are now clamoring against but i don't think they would name it a lack of feasting and fasting or i don't think they name it an inappropriate guest host relationship i think they name it economics they would name it like not enough opportunity

**P.Shchelin:**
you know and i hear i think absolutely i think it's first i really want to not defend west in that respect not not because i like but just the problem is not in the west or east etc i think like proper way of understanding is modernity and yes west kind of created modernity but then it kind of spread around the whole world and it became common let's say if you wanted a common poison if we are borrowing the basically c.s lewis's language he called it commonly poisoned like basically we brew the poison but the poison became spread around everywhere so i think it's just more correct talk about it in this form because it's not the western problem like unfortunately like i wish it may be part of my wish i could say no i

**J.Heers:**
think you're

**P.Shchelin:**
right i think

**J.Heers:**
it's a better way to describe it as uh modern and pre-modern or enlightenment and pre-enlightenment yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
kind kind yeah that's just more intellectually clear what we are talking about and uh this idea of exactly neighbor and atomization again in the pattern of feasting and fasting it's exactly the same pattern which breaks this idea of a modern man because modern man is not truly alone but he is neither truly social like if you consider the feast to being the pinnacle of communion like a true communion you know like the like love jointly spread like love spreading around all the members of community and desires spreading all around of the members of community and the way everybody cares about each other in the table like do you want this do you want that or a little bit more of this like stuff like this and faster than a proper let's say proper individualism if you want to put it this way so it's a place when I limit myself when I introspect myself when I go into the depths of my heart then it's exactly two opposites of exactly the spectrum which modernity rejects both because you we kind of want to be neither.
We don't want to be truly in communion, but we also don't want to be truly in ourselves.
Like modern man finds loneliness, truth be told.
unbearable that's why we need all the sound around us like we need to constantly some sound in our ears and some some visual stimulation some audio stimulation so like everything's a true fast is against but we need it because we are not truly like we are not amongst no i don't know no or something right right

**J.Heers:**
nor feet right what's the opposite of the monk i guess is the um Yeah, the socialized

**P.Shchelin:**
citizen.
I don't know, jester, if you want to put it in a way, like absolute opposite.
Yes, yes.
Some sort of this.
Yes.
Like, yeah, you've been writing about neither lord nor hermit.
So you are neither lord nor hermit.
And in our life, that's the challenge of feasting and fasting routines that you kind of need to...
move between both so that's sometime of a hermitism and then sometime of a lordship and then it's kind of flow continuity but it is challenging and just that's what i find very interesting like

**J.Heers:**
well i used to think um so i'm interested in your take i know you're you're often speaking about orthodoxy

**P.Shchelin:**
how would you

**J.Heers:**
how would you categorize orthodoxy uh obviously it's a religion it's a worldview it's a it's a it's an epistemology it's a way of knowing so let's let's just say when i adopted that orthodoxy as a as a hope as a type of glasses through which to see just kantian but let's just leave it like that for

**P.Shchelin:**
a minute um i've

**J.Heers:**
been i i started I've been wanting the whole, I've been wanting the jester, and I've been wanting the communion.
Because as a modern person before orthodoxy, I got all the characteristics of an individual.
I was rewarded by being a good individual in the way that the West rewards individuals.
And I've been trying to shed, but it's a little bit disingenuous.
Because I'm creating false dichotomies as I go.
And the true Orthodox person is integrating the two.
They're not fighting one against the other.
And even when I do my podcast, I catch myself.
And there's a reason I catch myself.
It's because it's fun to juxtapose old and new.
It's fun to be a battler.
And it's fun to, it's interesting anyway, to create really articulate.
opposites but i'm learning as i got older as an orthodox person my job is integration and and so in some way feast and fast is an integration right into what we've always meant to be so pavel the and i always say your name the way i say it but it's kind of it's kind of how people

**P.Shchelin:**
it's the way you love it don't worry

**J.Heers:**
so guess what though the prodigal does not return he returns to his father but he returns to a feast

**P.Shchelin:**
yes

**J.Heers:**
you have to remember that the father says go find the lamb

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah yeah yeah the feast is created for his return absolutely yeah it's it's like because feast is an ultimate goal i would say all images of heaven are not about fasting like it or not it's about feasting like and all the symbolism is about feasting it's the fast is a preparation for the feast like the fast if anything it's precisely the period so you can appreciate the feast more like it's something which makes the feast stronger but i think it is very important again in the context of land uh because land is a complicated topic nowadays i think i will a little bit derail and then come back because i think it is related

**J.Heers:**
uh

**P.Shchelin:**
what we what we miss nowadays is that historically speaking land was always kind of organic process like it wasn't you know set of special rules like very complicated rules to follow or like very you know this neat picking of like can i actually eat this or can i actually eat this or like does this count or does it's not like it was more or less organic again like the exact set of rules we most commonly tend to use nowadays were actually created in a very particular historical context in a very particular communities actually mediterranean communities and mostly for monks and it's kind of became easy especially in other regions to then forget what is the purpose and especially since we moved into the age of abundance because historically like let's say not eating meat was not that much of a challenge for people because simply you eat meat only when you celebrate there was not simply even an idea of like you just eat meat every day like so it was so the rules were reflecting the bigger point and nowadays i think it's really important to rediscover the point i think if you want to put it this way not really hidden it's not hidden it's in the open but something we kind of tend to often overlook behind the rules like the point of all of us is to prepare yourself for the feast and that's just i think is a big area of a conversation of talking about it or explaining about it like not explaining just talking about it effectively to start because then it makes sense why like that what is the land is what's the purpose of a land is the purpose of a land is not to have a dietary restriction like that's just very clear but in modern day and age because of we are so far away from this organic world which whatever the rules were created it looks very artificial and like often in like you know families when one member is orthodox and another is not orthodox it's actually very challenging to explain why this is included and this is not included like it doesn't make it doesn't make any sense are you vegan or you're not vegan you know this type like what what are these rules for

**J.Heers:**
what do you think of the move though many modern churches The Orthodox still try to go by whatever the rules have been.
And the Catholics say, okay, pick something.
Pick something and don't eat it on Friday.
Or pick something and don't eat it.
Don't eat chocolate.
There's a mechanism for individual choice or something.
And is that an attempt to wrestle with modernity?

**P.Shchelin:**
I definitely think it's an attempt to wrestle with us in modernity.
And I will be open.
I don't have a universal great answer for it.
I think what is ultimately important and I think the almost answer will be parish by parish base truth be told like or something like this like because like ideally it should be based on a personal relations almost between to an extent priest and like you know as a parish member like there should be that general guideline and we definitely have a general guideline but the emphasis is definitely and I think I'm witnessing it more the definitely emphasis is becoming more in a spirit like like we need to make the let's say the technical rules more order towards the spirit of the spirit of a fast and that's where I think feast is coming from because that's where I think uh almost the challenge for fasting nowadays is that we are not feasting.
Again, I promise that I think this dual relationship is the key.
Because unless you have this big, abundant, excessive, moving beyond all of the ordinary borders feast at the end of a fasting period, it almost doesn't make sense to fast.
Like, ironically speaking.

**J.Heers:**
You're speaking, I love this thought.
Let's play that out for a second.
I want to get a little, let's, I'll share something as the Tamada.
So the Tamada is a Georgian.
We got to stay on this topic because I go all over it, but I want to stay on this because I'm going to bring it right to it right now.
But the Tamada is a Georgian toastmaster.
And I've been adopted by Georgians and I've adopted everything that they do in terms of throwing this party called the Supra.
And we do it at a restaurant.
as you know and you've been it was a wonderful time it was so it was good so good to feast with you so but here's what's happened is i've i've been hosting a lot of people at the restaurant not not not even not tens and tens but hundreds and hundreds common americans who come in and want to feast in this georgian tradition is very unique and i've met a lot of young people and something's happening it's very interesting um there's like a neutrality of sexual desire so you didn't think i was going to go there but i want to go there there seems to be even among secular people that i talk to they'll come in with their boyfriend there's something like a friendship that is pre-dating that's the wrong word but predating the sexuality of their attraction in other words they're friends in a neutral way and not thinking about sex.
And so why I bring this up, because you said you really need to know how to fast in order to, to feast in order to fast.
And you made me think that there is a weird thing happening in society right now, where it's like, let's ignore the edges.
Let's ignore the fast and the feast.
And let's get right down to this Royal path.
And it's like, these, these couples are, They're ignoring the beauty of the feast, which is the sex of a married couple, right?
And they're trying to go right to this middle place of friendship as if it was a moral good.
And therefore, then they don't also fast.
They don't have to fight the desire to not be with each other.
For instance, I don't want to sit on a couch with a woman and date them for year after year.
Because the joy in some ways is the feast, which is the sexual relation.
You see what I'm saying?
Which would imply then that I get to be around her, but as a faster.
And so as anyone who's fasting knows, you don't sit around and fry up chicken and sit there and make all the most delicious meal and then don't eat it.
It's very weird.
And so I want to throw this to you.
It's torturous, but what I've noticed is.
I wouldn't call them ascetics.
See, this is what's so weird.
This is what I'm trying to say.
I'll say it.
Doing these tables have introduced me to non-ascetic ascetics.
People who practice asceticism without it being ascetic.
In other words, there is no feast that they're trying to avoid.
And I think it's very unhealthy.
I think it's much healthier if we lived with more passion.
and more with more feasting passionate for the for the desire for the thing and more fasting i don't

**P.Shchelin:**
know no it makes a little sense and and that's actually well let's go deeper but i think it's exactly the same pattern of life and death because any life is a product of movement the only place when there is no movement is the movement of death and this uh proper asceticism is aimed ultimately towards life one way or another as an abundant feast literally or an abandoned feast when let's say monks start seeing energies it's like it's better than a fist it's not like it's not abstract it's more like sensual according to what we know it's more sensual even in indescribably intense and you're a good a good fist is so it's this but more and more purified, et cetera, but it's this.
Or we can say that feast is this, but it's more down-to-earth form.
So that's a proper monasticism.
But the quasi-monasticism you are talking about, and I definitely see it a lot, let's be honest, in myself or people around me, it's exactly the desire of neither.
So it's the desire of stability, the lack of movement, because here comes an interesting part, because...
In any proper host and guest relationship, so in any movement, there is always a hidden danger.
It's always a double-edged sword.
Yes.
So a certain bravery is required to be alive, if you want to put it this way.
A certain bravery is required to be with a woman.
A certain bravery is required to be a guest.
And I guess that means we're just very coward people.
Like modern man is a very coward thing.

**J.Heers:**
This is...
You put the words to what I was trying to say, which is there's these beautiful people.
By the way, people are beautiful.
They have simply avoided the possibility of the sword of the danger.
You're absolutely right.
And somehow I want to pat him on the back as a father of daughters.
But I don't think it's a good thing because it it leads the man into a place of some sort of.
weakness in not being able to admit the danger of your manhood to your girl.
I desire the feast.
And so I can't lay on your couch all night.
I really like that.
It's also very old world.
Very Georgian.
And I think Russian if you go back in time.

**P.Shchelin:**
Any traditional like Serbian.
German, French, any traditional culture.

**J.Heers:**
Any tradition where the man is meant to be in the presence of a woman and burn in ways that only he knows because he's so strong.
But he would admit to a burning.
He would admit to a fire and a fight within himself if asked, especially by other men.
But by the woman, he would simply either remove himself or he would move toward marriage, of course, or other things.

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah but but that's the thing yeah it's exactly still the pattern like at least the recognition of a desire and taking responsibility for this desire one way or another which also requires bravery and again we're coming to this uh point of kind of false comfort again sorry really sound that's the way i wanted but it kind of is a false comfort because it's kind of like even in like 20th century russian songs like couple very popular one uh basically there is this line like if you if you are not living you don't have to die something along this line so in in a way like you can say that this cowardness is also related to this fear of death because both feast if you say that feast is this image of life in its fullest like an image not life in its fullest but it's an image of life in its fullest And fast is an image of willing full spiritual death to come back to life.
Let's say to go like into the desert and to go into the grave to an extent and then to come back to life.
Then this quasi-asceticism isn't either.
It's neither life nor death.
It's this kind of in-between.
It's constant limbo.
Like if you want to put it this way, it's a limbo.
And limbo became such a norm for just as you can call it even a spirit of time.
The spirit of time is limbo.
zen that's

**J.Heers:**
good that's very true it's a spiritual limbo i do think i do think we're in a but i do think we're in an age of i do think there's desire there's greed um but spiritually i do think it is it's an empty time but it's being filled up it's it's being filled up by the you know the powers and the principalities of post-modernism but also There's a Christian narrative that's returning, I think, all over the modern world.
What will it become?
That's a really good question.
You made me had a thought.
Can I share it with you?
I think I get into this a lot, this philosophy of the table and of feasting, and I love it.
I think I want to really write a book about this, but I want to say this to you.
What I noticed about the Georgian Supra, which, by the way, can happen three or four times in a week.
So I just want you to know that like we know families in Georgia that they're not trying.
They're not like on Friday, big party.
It builds on itself.
So the mother and the auntie will cook and then the guests will come over and then another person.
And it's just sort of happens.
But it happens.
And this is what I want to share.
It happens with order.
And I think a proper feast has elements of the fast.
Yes.
And so much like monasticism, you would never say it's always a fast if you go to a monastery.
There's great, even in a funeral, you feel bright sadness.
There's always a hint of joy in a monastery.
And at a proper feast, at least I would argue the Georgians have done as well as anyone in history doing a proper feast.
You wouldn't see it at a round table if they can avoid it.
There might be a round table, but the round table implies some sort of equality and democracy.
Instead, you're going to see a long table with a head.
The head is usually a toastmaster who calls everything to attention.
You wouldn't be very odd to have a Tamada that doesn't call the table to attention, the odd table.
And at the other end of the table is usually the oldest male.
which is a sign of, it's like a bookend sign of, you know, God, the father, God, the son, bishop.
And there's all this order and there's order in the toasting, but there's a major consumption of wine, which is the ultimate, right?
In many ways, for many people, that's the ultimate expression of feast.
But the Georgian table, you drink a lot, but it's like not the point to drink a lot.
The point is to honor a lot or to be in a constant state of honor.
and offering honor.

**P.Shchelin:**
And vulnerability.
That's, I think, very connected.
Maybe you can connect vulnerability and honor as a pair.

**J.Heers:**
Let me do that because it's really true.
Someone, a dishonorable person, let's just say a dishonorable person approaches you and in that approach, you sense something like dishonor.
The last move at that point is for you to be vulnerable.
You'll immediately begin to meet his perceived dishonor with some sort of guard or attack.
And so at a supra, when it's most beautiful is when the tamarad is most honorable because he provides a safe place for the vulnerability of his guests.
And they know that when they act in a vulnerable way through a toast about their mother or something that was said to them, the Tamada will protect them with his honor.
And you see tables that go sideways.
You see fat feasts that go sideways are when the table demands that the Tamada not enter as an authority figure, but rather sits on the side.
And then you see a lot of dishonor, but you also see less vulnerability.

**P.Shchelin:**
I think it's really interesting.
It came up because, again, not scripted.
The whole conversation is not scripted.
Not scripted.

**J.Heers:**
By the way, sorry.
Tell your guests, sorry.
It's not scripted.

**P.Shchelin:**
Because it goes.
No, it's totally fine.
I think that's what the beauty of this conversation is.
Because it connects to what we talked before.
We don't want to be vulnerable.
and it's understandable to be vulnerable to become open like to share any truth effectively makes you open and to share any truth you have to be open but to be open also means to be vulnerable so that's why we created the shields of lies like just generally relying about our feelings we're liking about ourselves relying about um like about everything like the modernity is basically an age where lies a virtue like that's one way of describing it which in my opinion is very sad and the proper feast as well as the proper fast ironically because the point one of the point of a fast has to become true with yourself like to look deep in your heart uh through let's say through limitation and you can say then the feast is a way to look deep into your heart through excess and to become vulnerable is still through an excess because you're sitting with your friend and suddenly your friend is basically publicly sharing his love towards you and uh it's a mixed feeling it is a mixed feeling for a prideful man like because on the one hand You don't know how to react.
At least we as modern people, we don't know.
Maybe it was different in the old world.
Maybe it was way more natural.
But I think to an extent it was even back then.
We always like to pretend this false modesty is a form of self-protection.
But then suddenly this vulnerability shows up.
And it's a moment of truth.
Because in truth you are vulnerable.
And I think that's what you've been talking about a lot.

**J.Heers:**
I love this idea, this question.
because i don't know and you don't know either because we live today and there has been a shift in the way that human beings see themselves our anthropology about ourselves the story is different i'm an animal with a rational mind whatever i am so fascinated with that question is um because in georgia i still see it i'm going next week and i'll see it again um you'll see someone gush i don't know you know that word gush their their words are um almost effeminate with praise and it's very weird because I feel just as you described like stop enough it seems though the men that I like the most in Georgia this isn't all people by any means but the men I like the most they seem to exhibit something old which is like yeah I know what you're doing you have to do it and I'm not going to dishonor it by acting like you should stop because It's not about me.
It's about you doing the right thing.

**P.Shchelin:**
Isn't that weird?
It makes sense, but it is weird for us.
That's why I would put it this way.

**J.Heers:**
It's odd.
It goes back to that idea of being a proper guest, which is I'm going to allow your words to flow over me because I know what you're doing.
You're offering the meal.
You're offering the feast to me.
So I'm not going to reject your feast.

**P.Shchelin:**
maybe also but that's the thing and maybe i will accept it in a sense maybe this actually reveals me more about me than i thought i am or like something i thought i want to be wow

**J.Heers:**
this is the best idea right which is it's not false see i think at least i was trained to hear that as as it's it's it's excessive and dangerous in that it it could engender pride somehow I think that's true.
I do think that's a spiritual danger.
It's about the construct of the table.
It's like you're meant to do it now.
It's like you're invited now.
The rules are such where the feast is inviting you to do it now.
And you should.
And I think we need times like that in life as human beings where we praise people that way.

**P.Shchelin:**
Absolutely.
Because it's exactly this point.
You brought it up.
There is a time and place for it.
like that's the thing it's the time and place to reveal the truth and like if you're revealing this truth and even if a person is generally bad but he's not completely bad if somebody genuinely gives him this honor then he did something good in his life and it's not the cause of pride if anything i think to an extent to a truly prideful person like even boasting person to be in a proper ordered feast is still challenging because guess what it won't be just about him he will see people praising other people ironically it will actually bring him down but in an honorable way you

**J.Heers:**
see that too at our events where you joined you have to sit around and hear all the other praises and it can be difficult I know what you mean especially for a proud person no doubt you know when I struggle you know when I struggle For people who don't know anything about this, we run a restaurant, so we invite people to these dinners.
And the dinners have this, they're super, they're Georgian.
But sometimes I sit at the table, not as the Tamada.
Do you know I struggle?

**P.Shchelin:**
I believe.
You want to do it the right way.
Like, oh, no, you should have done this.
Oh, you know, you should have done that.
But you really like forcing yourself.
It's his.
It's his.
It's not mine.
It's his.
That's right.

**J.Heers:**
That's right.
It's pride.
It's fascinating.
I love this talk because I really do think in the end, the royal path has to include both.
And the royal path is peace.
As the Georgians say, it's a piece of soul.
And when you have it, you begin to give gratitude and thanks to everything.
And I just feel like we've lost track a little bit.

**P.Shchelin:**
I actually think that's one important element to it.
which the word you mentioned, I just want to stress it, the gratitude.
I think, again, both in fast and feasting, you have the gratitude element.
The fast is more like internal gratitude, if you want to put it this way, silent gratitude.
And feast is, let's say, external gratitude, open gratitude, but still gratitude because we live in an age where we give thanks all the time.
It's part of the common politeness.
And again, I'm not talking about other people.
I will just take myself.
It's hard to be grateful.
It's not easy to be grateful.
Because you rationalize it.
You think, well, I did this, I did that.
Or it happens through my own merit.
Stuff like this.
Most of the thing.
But true gratitude also is a moment of vulnerability.
Because I'm admitting that I myself is not enough.
I am me only through...
like these people around me or people in my past or maybe people in my future ultimately through god but still you again putting yourself in through gratitude you're putting your place in a way of hierarchical manner and during the proper feast the gratitude is precisely flowing it is the flow of gratitude all around and this gratitude opens up and reveals and makes the truth and challenges it but that's why it's possible but that's why it's not boasting it's not even that's right what's the word for it?
It's not like hypocritical.
You're not lying to a person.
You're sharing the gratitude and you're being honest.
So that's a proper way of doing it.
That's what I just...

**J.Heers:**
That's right.
Well, gratitude in the end, I think...
I've had this thought and I want to give it to you and tell me what you think.
I think part of the problem is in history, we've never really seen...
a nation and i'm not saying that we see one now maybe some in europe that are thoroughly atheistic because i've had conversations with atheists about to whom to what how does an atheist a true atheist there's very few true atheists in the world but there's some maybe how do they give gratitude and to whom the question i guess i'm asking you is do you think as a philosophical exercise do you think you can be grateful if you don't believe there is ultimately a creator

**P.Shchelin:**
to an extent but ultimately it's very challenging i think it is very challenging to put at least like ultimately not but i think it's really hard for people to truly believe that there is no creator deep like i me personally think most we kind of again tend to lie to ourselves like because i think ultimately if you sincerely believe into this you know full-on bulletproof materialism you should and uh your life is like nature like come you and not it's a good way but at least these guys were honest i would put it

**J.Heers:**
okay there you go they were honest exactly yeah

**P.Shchelin:**
so they were honest like and uh i just think we are having big lack of honesty when it comes to these matters and uh but to an extent we have the lack of honesty it's legitimately hard for us to be grateful like uh for for anything like truly because uh hey i think that's an interesting point like when you're in a proper feast often let's say the person who gives you gratitude like being with your friend your spouse your i don't know son or daughter you have a lot of things in your past between two of you like really a lot of things and none not all i bet none of not all of them are pleasant things And when this person gives you gratitude, it kind of almost invites you to simultaneously humility and forgiveness.
So you're simultaneously kind of forgiving them for all of the bad things which happened between you because you're embracing their gratitude, like embracing their honor.
But also, ironically, being this guest, you are in a position of power, ironically, because whether you reject or accept this honor.
so it's always delicate interplay happening and uh I would say organically it's supposed to be some internal part of us like the the very fact that we sit like already for an hour and rationalize this thing and talk about this thing says a lot about us that we kind of don't feel it intuitively like we live in an age where like we need to name these things like to even understand why and what is happening while like It's not how we were even 200 years ago.

**J.Heers:**
You may have made the most important point for me.
I love talking to you.
I always leave with good questions.
I think you just raised one, which is it's so important that we have this conversation.
The problem is that we have to have it.
It's very odd.
It speaks to the meekness that Christ talks about.
the meek inherit the earth because they're already closer to god without this conversation there's so much speaking going on right where they've already inherited the simplicity of god they don't have to go down this road i used to think those people were boring in fact if you go to west africa with me meek people are everywhere and i don't know if you've traveled

**P.Shchelin:**
but not to africa

**J.Heers:**
it's India is similar when I haven't been there, but people tell me, you know, this is the guy who, when you get off your bus, he runs up and takes your bags and takes it and carries it.
It's constant.
And you go, this guy's looking for money, but no, he's just moving your bag because you're the foreigner.
And then you see it all the time.
The image I have is of a hunched person, a simple person who's always helping.
And those people you find all the time, at least when you travel in real old world places.
Georgia is the same.
And what I'm saying is, is they're not really debating about feasts and fasts.
They kind of go to the wedding.
They know how the wedding is supposed to be.
They kind of go home and they say their prayers.
They know how the prayers are supposed to be.
And we put everything up in our heads, which is fine.
It's very interesting.
It's a little like porn.
It's exciting to talk about it and think about it and move it around.
But it can get pretty awful.

**P.Shchelin:**
It can get pretty awful.
And it's always a question whenever you make a public talk.
And I know you make public talks yourself, so you're familiar with the danger of this boat.
I still think we not have to.
There is still good fruit.
in this type of conversation again nowadays but i definitely like acknowledge and admit that this conversation itself is the sign of illness and not the sign of health ideally like this type of truth or processes we are talking about kind of should be self-evident it's very ironic to talk about with american about self-evident because you know you hold these truths to be self-evident and stuff like this but well Yeah, I know.
And many, many capital T truth, actually, which are supposed to be self evident or not self evident, at least not for us.
And to an extent is a humility to admit it, and to try to rediscover it.
And that's what I think, like, moving to the final part of a conversation, I think it's just a sign of our age, like, and I think it's, in a way, a very unique challenge, again, not to, you know, to tinkle the pride of ours but just admitting what the reality we live in a very unique age where nothing we can take we can rely on nothing for granted i will explain what i mean for most part of history uh people were naturally organically part of a tradition they didn't have to make a choice i'm born here it's the way it is like that's what the faces i go to church every sunday or something or like i like God sends a child, I have a child, a man goes to war, man goes to war, and man dies in a war, and I became a widow, or whatever.
But all these things were natural, organic.
Even if I don't really want to do it, I don't have to think whether I want to do it.
I just do it because otherwise, yeah, sometimes brutal.
Otherwise I will be ostracized and kicked out of the village, and I don't want to die in a forest.

**J.Heers:**
That's the motivator.

**P.Shchelin:**
Pretty huge motivator for people, historically speaking.
Well, we live in a age where every choice becomes conscious.
Well, you need to choose your face.
You can't just rely on your parents' face.
You need to choose your spouse.
You can't rely on your parents or clan to pick up a spouse for you.
You need to choose, like, especially huge choice for women nowadays, you need to choose whether you will be a mother or you won't be a mother.
Again, it's not like our ancestors were that much virtuous than us.
I love them dearly, but facing the...
challenges and choices we have nowadays i like again and i speak because i have the case of russian revolution you know russian we've been really proud of being the orthodox country for millennia but then what revolution came and 80 percent just like okay well it was part of the thing and it never came into a heart like effectively like it was part of culture but it never came into a heart we had a lot of people to whom it came to her heart and like last week we had the feast of matters like new martyrs of russia like

**J.Heers:**
oh yeah that's right that's right yeah my daughter is named after one of the new murders

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah but the idea is like so it was a moment of revelation and if i have to look into you know not constructive but providential importance of our time generally speaking is the end of modernity is it is a moment of revelation like everybody everywhere in almost every country to an extent that is touched by modernity has to choose again you have to choose again like what you believe in it where you stand and to our conversation you need to choose to feast you need to choose to fast you don't have to like there is no societal pressure on you like there is nothing pushing you towards it but you need but if you choose it it's upon you and that's why to an extent and i know maybe you have a different opinion that's why i think from a weird point these feasts you're throwing in america are to an extent more valuable and deeper than the feasts which are thrown in georgia precisely because of this because people who come to this feast and people who now throwing the feast stuff like around the country or to an extent even in modern russia i know exactly the same because it's still it's a willing choice to reject the atomization it's a willing choice to do something which is uncomfortable it's a willing choice to do the thing which you think is right even you don't truly understand why it's right and that values a lot i i think there is something about it

**J.Heers:**
well it goes to the greek to remember to put back together again which is really the the role of every human being it's it's not like i reject and i know you do too i reject the idea that the enlightenment was a special kind of human fall that that leads us now to eternal perdition yada yada uh i do think it's a it's a special kind of worldview that's pretty rare in human history.
You don't see a lot of that happening in the Enlightenment and individualism, you know, Cartesian anthropology and all that.
You don't see that.
But I will say this.
There's something going on right now that our little group of folks who borrow this Georgian tradition, it's not Georgian.
What I mean by that is it is exceptionally, as you said, it is an exceptional foray into being healthy it's just a human act of trying to be hospital hospitable and we're just using the georgian form um in part because of circumstances of our lives yeah because it's important

**P.Shchelin:**
because it's good like it's a very good form like and it's exactly the structural element of tradition but that's always the danger with tradition and that's why uh that's why in a way i i guess what i want to say i do understand why we ended up with modernity because we took tradition well it sounds a little bit big but correct me if like you think i'm going too far but effectively the reason always inherent danger and tradition to become for his sake if you want to put it this way just naturally happens because and again it's not just a tradition is bad but it's like by through creating order there is always inherent danger to just keep a form without substance like it's just nature we cannot live without the form but there is always danger in the form to replace the substance and then stuff like enlightenment or modernity effectively comes as a punishment like in a way providentially it comes as a flood as a punishment

**J.Heers:**
that's interesting

**P.Shchelin:**
you value your own form let's see how truly you value your own form when you forgot it what is the substance is when i present you with a true temptation well we see the outcome and what you see now it's exactly trying to take a good form but to take it precisely as a form and putting the substance in a focus which is if you want to say i think it's exactly the point of let's say history we are in like

**J.Heers:**
you know we tested it um by we started to get nervous because people really liked the restaurant and we were doing very well and we all felt the tamadas there who were americans that we felt perhaps we had pulled it too far afield.
You know, on the left, they would call this cultural appropriation or something like that.
So I never felt that, but I began to wonder.
And so we went back and we found Georgian.
She's a historian of the Supra.
And we interviewed her.
You can see it on my podcast.
And what she did, essentially, without being too melodramatic, is she just checked.
each box we feared with, don't worry.
You will be led by God.
And if you're honest, then you will have a proper supra and you will not mock our Georgian traditions.
But other than that, I have no advice.
She made us aware that you have a blessing.
It was like a bishop's blessing.
She's done many papers on it and studied Georgian tradition.
And so for us, it was enough.
And just to say, go forward with a good and honest heart and you're not really appropriating anything you're you're remembering that which has always existed you know

**P.Shchelin:**
yeah well i think this word remember might be the key remember is definitely it's i think it's better than choose again so i think the meaning behind is kind of the same so remember or choose again but point being and that's the spirit of age we're living in and uh it's both for difficult things in one form and difficult things in another form like everything is effectively becoming difficult when you're trying to remember things which like again as a matter of it's pretty simple imagine you your leg fell asleep but it fell asleep for let's say 30 years it would be really hard to start working on it again like it would be really hard to start working on it again but that's effectively what we are trying to do with our like spiritual health and spiritual soul And the extent is different depending on the context, but the general pattern is the same.
And that's what I think.

**J.Heers:**
Can I maybe, we don't have to end, but I have a type of ending.
Can I toast you?

**P.Shchelin:**
Perfect.

**J.Heers:**
But it's going to be in that flattering kind of way.
So I want to say, for people listening, this might be something like one of the toasts.
There was a moment in my life.
where we took a chance to have a party and make that party into something like a supra, a Georgian supra, and then invite people from around the country to come and pay to be a part of it so that we could raise money.
And I was very afraid no one would care.
And then out of the blue came two Russian Ukrainian Eastern people named Andrew and Pavel.
You came, see, you have to sit for the flattery now.
You came in the night in a way that I, you were unannounced.
I knew something was happening, but I didn't know what, because the moment you took to your first toast, I said, someone has invited a Tamada.
And from that moment on, we've been friends, not because you were a good Tamada, but because you dared to embody, this spirit to remember it and out of the blue show up with people you don't know and now because of that you and i and others have built many other rivulets of beauty and so i want to toast to the the moment that we call the unknown into which we must walk and with love and you did and so to you brother gagimarjos cheers The good news is, is I didn't have to be, I was sailing from my heart.
So thank you, brother.

**P.Shchelin:**
Well, I will end it here.
Just will mention like all links to your work will be in the description.
It's a foundation you run, which is amazing.
It's a restaurant you run for those who live in the USA.
It is amazing.
Definitely worth visiting.
And it's everything else you want me to put there, I will put down there.
Thank you, brother.
And thank you.

**J.Heers:**
It's a joy.
And we did it.
You got to come on my show, and now here I am.
I'm thankful.
Yeah, guys, check us out.
All around the world, there's people working for us.
So God bless.

**P.Shchelin:**
More will come.

**J.Heers:**
Little by little.
